1 In State Estimation in Smart Grids Using Temporal Graph Convolution Networks,
    Graph NNs are utilized to train a time graph connecting nodes of different states
    if the network nodes through time. The edges connect the time nodes

2. Physics Informed Neural Nets incorporate physical equations in the NN model.
    For example you can incorporate grid physical lays (like power flow equations)
    in the loss function as does Physics-Informed Graphical Learning and Bayesian
    Averaging for Robust Distribution State Estimation

3. There are two challenges for the WLS-based DSSE method:
    the iterative process requires accurate line parameters and
    topology of the system that are difficult to obtain in practice.
    In addition, the distribution network may be subject to topology
    error. This causes huge challenges for tackling (2); 2) solving the
    nonconvex optimization problem is computationally expensive
    and requires many iterations. This is further aggravated by the
    increasing integration of DERs and electric vehicles and the
    growing distribution system size.

4. This article (2) proposes a robust topology change-aware DSSE
    method based on the physics-informed GNN and BPWA. His-
    torical data are first utilized to learn the nonlinear relationship
    between the measurements and state variables under different
    topologies. During this stage, the structural knowledge of his-
    torical topologies is embedded into the GNN. Then, the BPWA
    method is applied to address the estimation problem utilizing
    sparse training samples recorded under the new topology. Com-
    parative tests with several benchmarking methods demonstrate
    that: 1) the proposed method is robust to the anomalous measure-
    ments and achieves much better performance than the traditional
    learning-based method when some real-time measurements are
    lost; 2) the proposed method can achieve fast adaption to topol-
    ogy changes utilizing a limited amount of samples recorded
    under the new topology; 3) when dealing with a new topology,
    the BPWA method can preserve the robustness achieved by
    the physics-informed graph attention network in presence of
    outliers; 4) the BPWA allows the proposed method to achieve
    effective quantification of the state estimation uncertainties. In
    our future works, more intelligent methods that can detect and
    better deal with PV connection scenarios will be developed.

5. In State Estimation of Energy Internet Using SCADA and PMU Data Based on Graph Convolutional Networks
    1) GCN is first introduced to state estimation of EI in this
        paper. By considering EI topology, GCN achieves the
        fusion of SCADA and PMU data with the adjacency
        matrix and graph convolution operations.
    2) Multiple output batches are constructed in GCN. Thus,
        transient states of all EI buses can be obtained simulta-
        neously.
    3) The case study on an IEEE 9 bus system shows that the
        proposed method achieves fast transient state estimation
        and more accuracy transient voltages during faults than
        the state-of-the-art methods.
    To construct the GCN model for the specific EI system,
    firstly, the graph of EI system is built by taking EI buses as
    graph nodes and taking power lines in EI as edges of graph.
    Then, an adjacency matrix with the size of 6 × 6 is built
    to describe the EI topology. The GCN model is structured
    with three graph convolutional layers, and two fully connected
    layers are followed to extract the features of each node. The
    detail parameters of the GCN model are list in Table I. The
    features of the last graph convolutional layer are masked to
    output of the five buses without PMU measurement. Voltage,
    frequency and active power are the three channels to be
    estimated.


6. Topology Identification Using Graph Theory Informed State Estimation-Based Model
    Selection for Power Distribution Systems
     ELECTRIC power distribution systems can be subjected to
        several reconfigurations a day, for multiple purposes, such
        as loss minimization, load balancing, restoration after faults, and
        to allow more penetration of distributed energy resources

        A two-stage approach for topology identification of power distri-
        bution systems is proposed in this article. A graph theory analysis
        is implemented in the first stage to reduce the sample space
        of the given combinatorial problem. The system connectivity
        matrix and system measurements identify a set of candidate
        topologies. The second stage solves a WLS SE of the candidate
        topologies. The model with the least objective value overall is
        selected as the identified topology for the given set of measure-
        ments. Focusing on the topology instead of precise state esti-
        mates allows simplifications to be introduced into the WLS SE
        formulation.
        Unlike mixed-integer-based formulations, we adopt a graph
        theoretic approach to shrink the sample space of possible switch
        combinations, thus avoiding an exhaustive search among all pos-
        sible topologies. For solving the SE problem, we leverage scarce
        measurements from the lines and buses where the distribution
        network is typically instrumented. Furthermore, the proposed
        approach is not restricted to the degree of topology change as
        determined by the number of switch statuses that have changed
        from the last known topology.


7. In State Estimation in Electric Power Systems Leveraging Graph Neural Networks
    The state estimation (SE), which estimates the set of power
    system state variables based on the available set of mea-
    surements, is an essential tool used for the power system’s
    monitoring and operation [1]. A fast state estimator is required
    to maximise the use of phasor measurement unit (PMU)
    high sampling rates. In this paper, we propose training a
    graph neural network (GNN) on a dataset of SE inputs and
    outputs, to provide fast and accurate predictions during the
    evaluation phase. One of the main benefits of using GNNs
    in power systems is the fact that the prediction model is
    not limited to the training and test examples of fixed power
    system topologies, which is not the case with common deep
    learning methods. GNNs exploit the graph structure of the
    input data [2] [3], resulting in a lower number of learning
    parameters, reduced memory requirements, and incorporate
    the connectivity information into the learning process as well.
    Furthermore, the inference phase of the trained GNN model
    can be distributed, since the prediction of the state variable of
    a node requires only K-hop neighbourhood measurements.    

    In this paper, the proposed model operates on factor-graph-
    like structures, which enables trivial inclusion and exclusion
    of any type of measurements on the power system’s buses and
    branches, by adding or removing the corresponding nodes in
    the graph. The trained model is tested thoroughly in the various
    missing data scenarios which include communication errors in
    the delivery of isolated phasor data or failures of the complete
    PMUs, in which the power system is unobservable, and the
    reports on the prediction qualities are presented.

    In this paper, we present a study on possibilities to use
    GNNs as fast linear SE with PMUs solvers. We propose
    a model with graph attention network based architecture,
    which operates on heterogeneous graphs, containing variable
    nodes that output the predictions based on the WLS SE
    solutions, and factor nodes, which take PMU voltage and
    current measurements and variances as inputs and propagate
    them in the local neighbourhood. Evaluating the trained model
    on the unseen data samples confirms that the proposed GNN
    approach can be used as a very accurate approximator of the
    WLS SE solutions. By testing the model on scenarios in which
    individual phasor measurements, or the whole PMUs fail to
    deliver measurement data to the proposed SE solver, we have
    found that adding variable-to-variable node connections in the
    training and test graphs significantly improves the predictions
    in the cases when the system of equations defining the SE
    problem becomes underdetermined.

    Augmented graph with PMU measurement nodes and real measurements
        
8. Robust and Fast Data-Driven Power System State Estimator Using Graph Neural Networks
    Motivation: The state estimation (SE), which estimates the
    set of power system state variables based on the available set of
    measurements, is an essential tool used for the power system’s
    monitoring and operation [1]. With the increasing deployment
    of phasor measurement units (PMUs) in power systems, a
    fast state estimator is required to maximise the use of their
    high sampling rates. Solving PMU-based SE, represented as a
    linear weighted least-squares (WLS) problem, involves matrix
    factorisations. Neglecting the PMU measurement covariances
    represented in rectangular coordinates is a common practice
    [2] that results in near O(n2 ) computational complexity for
    sparse matrices, where n denotes the number of power sys-
    tem’s buses. Recent advancements in graph neural networks
    (GNNs) [3]–[5] open up novel possibilities for developing
    power system algorithms with linear computational complexity
    and potential distributed implementation. One of the primary
    advantages of using GNNs in power systems instead of tradi-
    tional deep learning methods is that the prediction model is not
    O. Kundacina is with The Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research
    and Development of Serbia (e-mail: ognjen.kundacina@ivi.ac.rs), M. Cosovic
    is with Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Sarajevo, Bosnia
    and Herzegovina (e-mail: mcosovic@etf.unsa.ba), D. Vukobratovic is with
    Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Serbia, (email:
    dejanv@uns.ac.rs).
    restricted to training and test examples of fixed power system
    topologies. GNNs take advantage of the graph structure of
    the input data, resulting in fewer learning parameters, lower
    memory requirements, and the incorporation of connectivity
    information into the learning process. Furthermore, the infer-
    ence phase of the trained GNN model can be distributed and
    performed locally, since the prediction of the state variable
    of a node requires only K-hop neighbourhood measurements.
    Additional motivation for using GNNs as well as the other
    deep learning methods for data-driven SE comes from the
    power system parameters’ uncertainty [6]. However, note
    that GNNs provide an option of incorporating power system
    parameters via edge input features [7].

    Contributions: This paper proposes training a GNN for
    a regression problem using the inputs and the solutions of
    linear SE with PMUs to provide fast and accurate predictions
    during the evaluation phase. The following are the paper’s
    main contributions:
    Inspired by [17], we present the first attempt to utilise
    GNNs over the factor graphs [18] instead of the bus-branch
    power system model for the SE problem. This enables
    trivial integration and exclusion of any type and number of
    measurements on the power system’s buses and branches, by
    adding or removing the corresponding nodes in the factor
    graph. Moreover, the factor graph is augmented by adding
    direct connections between variable nodes to improve in-
    formation propagation during neighborhood aggregation,
    particularly in unobservable scenarios when the loss of the
    measurement data occurs.
    • We present a graph attention network (GAT) [5] based
    model to solve the SE problem, with the architecture spe-
    cialised for the proposed heterogeneous augmented factor
    graph. GNN layers that aggregate into factor and variable
    nodes each have their own set of trainable parameters. Fur-
    thermore, distinct sets of parameters are used for variable-
    to-variable and factor-to-variable message functions in GNN
    layers that aggregate into variable nodes.
    • Due to the sparsity of the power system graph, and the fact
    that the node degree does not increase with the total number
    of nodes, the proposed approach has O(n) computational
    complexity, making it suitable for application in large-scale
    power systems.
    • We investigate the proposed model’s local-processing nature
    and demonstrate that significant result degradation caused
    by PMU or communication failures affects only the local
    neighborhood of the node where the failure occurred.
    • We examine the proposed model’s robustness to outliers
    and improve it solely by augmenting the training set with
    examples that contain outliers.
    • The inference of the trained GNN is easy to distribute
    and parallelize. Even in the case of centralised SE im-
    plementation, the processing can be done using distributed
    computation resources, such as graphical-processing units.
    An important decision to be made while creating the GNN
    model is to select the GNN’s aggregation function. Aggrega-
    tion functions that are commonly used include sum, mean, min
    and max pooling, and graph convolution [22]. One common
    drawback of these approaches is that incoming messages from
    all of the node’s neighbours are weighted equally, or using
    weights calculated using the structural properties of the graph
    (e.g., node degrees) prior to training. Graph attention networks
    (GATs) [5] propose using the attention-based aggregation, in
    which the weights that correspond to the importance of each
    neighbour’s message are learned from the data.
    Inspired by the recent work [23] in which the power system
    SE is modelled as a probabilistic graphical model, the initial
    version of the graph over which GNN operates has a power
    system’s factor graph topology, which is a bipartite graph that
    consists of the factor and variable nodes and the edges between
    them.
    We evaluate the robustness of the proposed model to outliers
    among input data using the same experiment setup described
    in Sec. IV-A and test samples generated with measurement
    variance 10−5 . In every test set sample, we randomly replace
    an existing measurement with a value generated with a vari-
    ance 1600 times higher than the original one and transformed
    it into rectangular coordinates. For labels, we use WLS SE
    solutions with no outliers among the inputs. Table IV displays
    MSEs between the labels and the outputs of three different
    approaches, along with the results of the WLS SE and the
    approximative WLS SE algorithm for the same test set.
    In this research, we investigate how GNNs can be used
    as fast solvers of linear SE with PMUs. The proposed graph
    attention network based model, specialised for newly intro-
    duced heterogeneous augmented factor graphs, recursively
    propagates the inputs from the factor nodes to generate the
    predictions in the variable nodes based on the WLS SE
    solutions. Evaluating the trained model on the unseen data
    samples confirms that the proposed GNN approach can be
    used as a very accurate approximator of the linear WLS
    SE solutions, with the added benefit of linear computational
    complexity at the inference time. The model is robust in un-
    observable scenarios that are not solvable using standard WLSTABLE III
    T EST SET RESULTS FOR VARIOUS POWER SYSTEMS AND TRAINING SET SIZES .
    SE methods, such as when individual phasor measurements or
    entire PMUs fail to deliver measurement data to the proposed
    SE solver. Furthermore, when measurement variances are high
    or outliers are present in the input data, the GNN model
    outperforms the approximate WLS SE. The proposed approach
    demonstrates scalability as well as sample efficiency when
    tested on power systems of various sizes, as it predicts the
    state variables well even when trained on a small number of
    randomly generated samples.
    While we focused on solving linear SE with PMUs, the
    proposed learning framework, graph augmentation techniques,
    and conclusions could be applied to a variety of SE formula-
    tions. One of them could be a GNN-based SE for highly unob-
    servable distribution systems, motivated by the GNN’s ability
    to provide relevant solutions in underdetermined scenarios.



9. Adaptive Graph Convolutional Network-Based Distribution System State Estimation
    Abstract— The management and control of the power
    systems rely on reliable and timely distribution system state
    estimation, which is present to be challenging due to
    significant voltage variations caused by high renewables.
    To tackle this problem, a graph convolutional network
    (AGCN) is proposed for the distribution system state
    estimation (DSSE) by considering highly volatile renewable
    generation. In particular, the AGCN can enable prompt
    state estimation for viable system states. In the proposed
    model, the graph convolutional layer can capture the
    correlations of the nodal power injections so that enhanced
    estimation accuracy can be achieved. Moreover, the
    node-embedding technique is employed in the graph
    convolutional layer to represent the nonlinear correlation
    nature, through which the proposed model is allowed to
    cover general scenarios in the application. The simulation
    results have been provided to verify the accuracy and
    effectiveness of the proposed model through IEEE 33-node
    and the 118-node distribution systems.
    To solve these problems, the AGCN model is proposed to
    better handle DSSE with correlations of renewables. Different
    from previous works, a novel graph convolutional operation is
    proposed to aggregate the related nodal information so that
    enhanced DSSE accuracy can be achieved.
    Spectral-based methods update the node’s representation by
multiplying its Fourier transform with its neighbor’s Fourier
transform. Spatial-based methods update the node’s
representation by convolutional itself directly with its
neighbor’s representation, which obtains more attention due to
their high effectiveness. The proposed model is spatially based.
A novel AGCN model is proposed to deal with the DSSE
problem with high-penetrated renewable power energy
exhibiting complex correlations. Compared with the traditional
methods, the results show the least improvement of 25% in the
evaluation indexes of estimated states without and with wind
and solar power correlations. This indicates that the AGCN can
capture the correlations among measurements to achieve
enhanced effectiveness. Besides, the proposed model also has a
much shorter computation time than traditional DDSE
methods. The results show the tremendous potential foreground

10. Graph neural networks on factor graphs for robust, fast, and scalable
linear state estimation with PMUs

Motivation: The state estimation (SE), which estimates the
set of power system state variables based on the available set of
measurements, is an essential tool used for the power system’s
monitoring and operation [1]. The increasing deployment of pha-
sor measurement units (PMUs) in transmission power systems
calls for a fast state estimator to take full advantage of their
high sample rates. Solving PMU-only SE, which is represented as
a linear weighted least-squares (WLS) problem, involves matrix
factorisations, which can be difficult in cases where the matrix is
ill-conditioned. It is common practice to neglect the phasor mea-
surement covariances represented in rectangular coordinates [2].
This can make the SE problem much easier to solve, but it also
results in a computational complexity of nearly O(n2 ) for sparse
matrices, where n is the number of power system buses. It is
challenging to use this approach for real-time monitoring of
large power systems. Recent advancements in graph neural net-
works (GNNs) [3–5] open up novel possibilities for developing
power system algorithms with linear computational complexity
and potential distributed implementation. One of the key benefits
of using GNNs in power systems instead of conventional deep
learning methods is that the prediction model is not restricted
to training and test examples of fixed power system topologies.
GNNs take advantage of the graph structure of the input data, and
hence are permutation invariant, have fewer trainable parame-
ters, and require less storage space. Furthermore, the inference
phase of many GNN models can be distributed and performed
locally, since the prediction of the state variable of a node only
requires measurements from the local neighbourhood, which ex-
tends to a specific distance from the node being predicted. GNNs,
as a model-free approach, can be useful when power system
parameters are uncertain or unreliable [6]. However, if necessary,
GNNs can incorporate power system parameters through the use
of edge input features [7].
Inspired by [27], we present the first use of GNNs on factor
graphs [28] for the SE problem, instead of using the bus-
branch power system model. This enables trivial integration
and exclusion of any type and number of measurements
on the power system buses and branches, by adding or
removing the corresponding nodes in the factor graph. Fur-
thermore, the factor graph is augmented by adding direct
connections between variable nodes that are 2nd-order
neighbours to improve information propagation during
neighbourhood aggregation, particularly in unobservable
scenarios when the loss of the measurement data occurs.
• We present a graph attention network (GAT) [5] model,
with the architecture customised for the proposed hetero-
geneous augmented factor graph, to solve the SE problem.
GNN layers that aggregate into factor and variable nodes
have separate sets of trainable parameters. Furthermore,
separate sets of parameters are used for variable-to-variable
and factor-to-variable message functions in GNN layers that
aggregate into variable nodes.
• Given the sparsity of the power system’s graph, and the fact
that node degree does not increase with the total number
of nodes, the proposed approach has O(n) computational
complexity, making it suitable for large-scale power sys-
tems. The inference of the trained GNN is easy to distribute
and parallelise. Even in the case of centralised SE imple-
mentation, the processing can be done using distributed
computation resources, such as graphical-processing units.
We demonstrate that the number of trainable parameters in the proposed GNN-based SE model is constant, while it
grows quadratically with the number of measurements in
conventional deep learning approaches.
• We study the local-processing nature of the proposed model
and show that significant degradation of results caused by
PMU or communication failures affects only the local neigh-
bourhood of the node where the failure occurred.
Inspired by recent work on using probabilistic graphical mod-
els for power system SE [33], we first create a GNN over a graph
with a factor graph topology. This bipartite graph consists of fac-
tor and variable nodes, and edges between them. Variable nodes
are used to create a s-dimensional node embedding for all real
and imaginary parts of the bus voltages, R(Vi ) and I(Vi ), which
are used to generate state variable predictions. Factor nodes, two
per measurement phasor, serve as inputs for the measurement
values, variances, and covariances, also given in rectangular coor-
dinates. These values are then transformed and sent to variable
nodes via GNN message passing. Unlike the approximative WLS
SE, the GNN includes measurement covariances in the inputs
without increasing the computational complexity. To achieve bet-
ter representation of node’s neighbourhood structure, we perform
variable node feature augmentation using binary index encod-
ing. Since variable nodes have no additional input features, this
encoding allows the GNN to better capture the relationships be-
tween nodes. Compared to one-hot encoding used in [29], binary
index encoding significantly reduces the number of input neurons.
Unlike approaches that apply GNNs over the bus-branch
power system model, such as in [24,26], the using GNNs over
factor-graph-like topology allows for the incorporation of various
types and quantities of measurements on both power system
buses and branches. The ability to simulate the addition or re-
moval of various measurements can be easily achieved by adding
or removing factor nodes from any location in the graph. In
contrast, using a GNN over the bus-branch power system model
would require allocating a single input vector to each bus that
includes all potential measurement data for that bus and its
neighbouring branches. This can cause problems, such as having
to fill elements in the input vector with zeros when not all
possible measurements are available, and making the output
sensitive to the order of measurements in the input vector. This
can make it difficult to accurately model the system and generate
reliable results.


10. Distribution Network Topology Identification with
Graph Transformer Neural Network

Abstract— The safety and stable operation of distribution
networks is of great significance to ensure reliable power supply.
Obtaining the dynamic topology of the distribution network
quickly and accurately is important to carry out system state
assessment and ensure system operation quality. However, it is
difficult to directly collect the real-time status of all switches and
lines in a distribution system, due to the limitation of the
deployment capability and data noise or mistake of the
measurement device. In this paper, a topology identification
model based on graph transformer neural network is proposed
to calculate and infer the current topological distribution based
on incomplete measurement information, aiming to overcome
the insufficiency and inaccuracy of traditional methods. First,
the data of distribution network is converted into a graph model
and effective features of system operation are selected. Then, the
graph-transformer-network-based topology identification
model of power distribution system is jointly trained by node
features, node labels and node connections, which can improve
computational efficiency while increasing the amount of input
information. Finally, the effectiveness and generalization of the
proposed method are verified on IEEE 33 case and PG&E 69
case.

This resulting in a changing structure of the network and a
more diverse and complex mode of operation, and network
security stability control and economic operation analysis are
challenged[4]. Compared with the transmission network, the
distribution network has limited measurement equipment and
lacks real-time telemetry and remote signaling[1]; at the same
time, if the topology changes during data collection, the
availability of data cannot be guaranteed, and the monitoring
information of real-time topology and line parameters is often
lost or unreliable. Therefore, in order to ensure the power
quality, it is necessary to carry out real-time topology
identification and intelligent dispatching of the distribution
network to realize the safe operation of the distribution
network.
This resulting in a changing structure of the network and a
more diverse and complex mode of operation, and network
security stability control and economic operation analysis are
challenged[4]. Compared with the transmission network, the
distribution network has limited measurement equipment and
lacks real-time telemetry and remote signaling[1]; at the same
time, if the topology changes during data collection, the
availability of data cannot be guaranteed, and the monitoring
information of real-time topology and line parameters is often
lost or unreliable. Therefore, in order to ensure the power
quality, it is necessary to carry out real-time topology
identification and intelligent dispatching of the distribution
network to realize the safe operation of the distribution
network.This resulting in a changing structure of the network and a
more diverse and complex mode of operation, and network
security stability control and economic operation analysis are
challenged[4]. Compared with the transmission network, the
distribution network has limited measurement equipment and
lacks real-time telemetry and remote signaling[1]; at the same
time, if the topology changes during data collection, the
availability of data cannot be guaranteed, and the monitoring
information of real-time topology and line parameters is often
lost or unreliable. Therefore, in order to ensure the power
quality, it is necessary to carry out real-time topology
identification and intelligent dispatching of the distribution
network to realize the safe operation of the distribution
network.


Afterwards, select node features which are more
significant to the topology identification task, the feature
importance of lightGBM calculation finds out that the
contribution of voltage amplitude is much higher than that of
power[22], indicating that node voltage amplitude is more
effective for topology identification task. Therefore, this paper
selects processed voltage feature as the input node feature.
Finally, the selected feature data and node connection
relationships are linked to the node status labels under the
corresponding topology structure to construct a graph data set.

In order to improve the accuracy and generalization ability
of distribution network topology identification, this paper
proposes a topology identification method with a graph deep
learning approach based on self-attention mechanism. This
method makes use of the natural graph structure properties of
the electric connection structure of system as prior knowledge,
and incorporates the features of the line and connection
relationship with surrounding lines and bus into the
calculation process. The effectiveness of the method is
verified by the IEEE 33 node and PG&E 69 node distribution
networks. The result shows that the accuarcy and
generalization ability of the proposed methed for unseen
topologies have been noticeably improved compared to
traditional meachine learning models.
This paper conducts a preliminary study on the application
of graph deep learning in distribution network topology
identification. The follow-up research work is to build and
optimize the model when missing some node information and
to further improve the application feasibility of the topology
recognition mode.


11. Spatiotemporal Graph Convolutional Neural Network Based Forecasting-Aided State Estimation Using Synchrophasors

Abstract—Power system state estimation is a primary and major
method for monitoring power grids in real time. Massive
synchrophasor data contains temporal correlations and spatial
characteristics based on the physical constraints of the power
system. The spectral-domain convolution method based on the
graph Fourier transform is used to construct a multilayer graph
convolution neural network model to predict the short-term states
of a power system, including the latest state when the power system
is in the quasi-steady state. Combining the advantages of linear
state estimation, a forecasting-aided state estimation method that
can take advantage of predicted values and phase measurement
units is designed to obtain the real-time state. Furthermore,
predicted innovations analysis method are proposed to identify
system mutations and bad data. Enough simulation tests validate
that the proposed method can accurately estimate the real-time
state of a power system.
S
TATE estimation is one of the core functions of the
energy management systems (EMSs) of power grid
dispatching and control centers. It is also the data source
for other network analysis applications and online security and
stability analysis applications. With the extensive integration of
clean energies and the widespread application of high-power
electronic equipment, the randomness and volatility of modern
power systems are greatly enhanced, and the operation modes
and dynamic characteristics of power grids are becoming
increasingly complex and changeable. The traditional state
estimation system based on a supervisory control and data
acquisition (SCADA) scheme has difficulty meeting the
requirements of fast and accurate state acquisition in modern
power grids in terms of estimation accuracy, real-time
performance and computational stability.
The development of phase measurement units (PMU) and
wide-area measurement systems (WAMS) provide a new way
to obtain the real-time state of a power system [1]-[3]. PMU
data have the following advantages: (1) the measurement
process is triggered by synchronous time, so the measurement
section has high synchronization; (2) the frequency of data
updating can reach twice that of the power system, enabling the
tracking of the dynamic changes of the system; and (3) the
voltage phasor and current phasor can be measured directly.
Most DSE methods are designed and executed based on the
idea of the Kalman filter. Such a filter typically consists of two
steps, namely, a prediction step and a filtering/update step.
Notably, the accuracy of state prediction directly affects the
accuracy of DSE. DSE methods, which consider only the quasi-
steady state of a power system, are also called forecasting-aided
state estimation (FASE) approaches [4]. In the early stages of
DSE methods, the techniques for describing the time evolution
model of system states are usually oversimplified [5], so the
predictive powers of these models are typically low and
insufficient for supporting high-precision DSE. The Kalman
filter method is time-consuming to calculate, so the distributed
dynamic estimation methods are also proposed [6]. Three
numerically stable square-root sigma-point Kalman filter (SR-
SPKF) algorithms are proposed to estimate the dynamic state
[7]. Exponential smoothing methods and other Kalman filtering
techniques have been used to estimate the parameters of
dynamic models online, making these models self-adaptive and
greatly improving their prediction abilities[8], [9]. Robust
Unknown input observer is also used for DSE, allowing it to
independently estimate the true state without taking into
account unknown inputs or disturbances that affect frequency
stability in real time [10].
GCN is trained using measurements in the power system
and output the fast and accurate predictions to obtain a linear
SE with PMUs solver [38]. [39] proposed novel physics-aware
GCN and GRN frameworks to capture both temporal and
spatial features of the voltage phasors data. A novel Unrolled
Spatiotemporal Graph Convolutional Network (USGCN)
model is proposed to timely estimate and forecast distribution
system states with high-penetrated renewable energy [40].
The primary innovations and
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
(1) This paper presents a power system state prediction
method based on GCN, which effectively leverages both the
temporal correlations inherent in dynamic systems and spatial
correlations based on the physical constraints of extensive state
data. This approach accurately predicts the current state of the
power system, particularly when it is in a quasi-stable state.
(2) By harnessing the strengths of linear state estimation, we
have designed a FASE method that intelligently integrates
predictive values and PMU measurements to estimate real-time
power grid states.
(3) We propose a novel technique for identifying system
mutations and bad measurement data through innovation
analysis. This method effectively eliminates bad measurements
and mitigates the risk of erroneous state estimation results
caused by the persistence of past predictions during power
system state transitions.
(4) Comprehensive simulation tests were conducted using
both IEEE test cases and real-world power grid scenarios,
utilizing genuine power grid data. These tests included
comparisons with state-of-the-art research in the field. The test
results unequivocally demonstrate the accuracy, robustness,
and applicability of the proposed FASE method.
In a power system, many components, such as generators,
exhibit dynamic behavior. These components respond to inputs
and past states, establishing a strong temporal relationship
between the current and previous states of the power system.
Consequently, power system states exhibit pronounced
temporal correlations. In the absence of external disturbances,
it becomes possible to make preliminary predictions about the
power system's state. Thus, the typical FASE method can be
developed based on the framework of Kalman filtering,
involving two steps: prediction and filtering, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. Initially, given the estimated state at time step k-1 x̂k−1
or earlier states, the predicted state x̅ k is calculated using
appropriate state prediction methods. In the subsequent filtering
step, these predictions, along with measurements at time step k,
are employed to estimate the state x̂k .




12. State Estimation in Smart Grids Using Temporal
Graph Convolution Networks

Abstract—State estimation (SE) is one of the key functions of
smart grids. The availability of large volumes of measurement
data introduces new opportunities for improving and comple-
menting the conventional model-based SE in power systems. In
this work, a data-driven approach based on Graph Convolution
Neural Networks (G-CNNs) is presented for SE in smart grids.
The G-CNN can learn the features in the non-Euclidean domain
of graphs, which can capture the structures and interactions
among the components of power grids. By integrating the
temporal dependencies in the time-series data, a temporal G-
CNN (T-GCN) is adopted for the SE problem. Specifically,
a message-passing G-CNN is used to capture the topological
structure of the smart grid and the gated recurrent units are
used to capture the dynamic variation of state information
for temporal dependencies. The performance evaluation of the
presented method for two cases of full measurement availability
and availability of a subset of measurements in comparison with
some of the existing SE techniques shows promising performance.
The state estimation (SE) is one of the main functions of the
WASA. The conventional state estimators have been widely
deployed in utility control centers to help with monitoring
the state of the system. However, traditional SE methods do
not adequately meet the real-time monitoring and accuracy
requirements for smart grids. Many of the model-based SE
techniques are based on steady-state analysis, which cannot
be accurate for modern power systems due to highly dy-
namic and stochastic variations introduced by, for instance,
distributed energy generations and fast-changing loads. Be-
sides, the deployment of phasor measurement units (PMUs)
and the availability of a large volume of measurement data,
introduce new opportunities for improving and complement-
ing the conventional model-based SE in power systems
such, in addition to conventional model-based SE, various
data-driven SE methods have been developed in the past
decade [2], [3]. Among such methods, variations of Kalman
Filters (KF), deep learning algorithms, such as Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN), Gated Recurrent Units (GRU), and
Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM), have shown promising
performance by learning the underlying nonlinear dynamics
of these systems.
To fill this gap, in this paper, temporal as well as graph-
based features of power system measurements are considered
in analyzing PMU time-series for SE. Specifically, a Graph
Convolutional Neural Network (G-CNN) is combined with
GRU units to create a spatio-temporal model that uses the
topology of the system in learning the patterns embedded
in the PMU time-series for SE. The performance of the
presented approach is compared with the SE techniques based
on Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE), Bayesian Mul-
tivariate Linear Regression with Auto Regression, Support
Vector Regression, and Multivariate LSTM, which do not
explicitly consider the graph structures in data. The presented
SE approach is also evaluated for the cases when the mea-
surements are available from all the buses and also when the
measurements are only available from a subset of buses. The
presented SE method shows improved performance under both
cases compared to the SE techniques that do not explicitly
consider the graph structures.
Some of the most popular data-driven SE methods are the
ones based on KF and variations of KF [2], such as Extended
Kalman Filter (EKF) [7], Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) [8],
Cubature Kalman Filter (CKF) [9], Particle Filter [10], and
Gaussian Mixture Filter [11]. The SE methods based on
regression-based optimization using past measurements [12]
and instantaneous correlations [13] of the measurements have
also been proposed in the literature. However, with the avail-
ability of a vast amount of data from smart grids sensors,
neural network-based techniques are becoming increasingly
popular in solving critical operations of smart grids [14]. For
instance, variants of artificial neural networks (ANN) [15],
such as RNN [16], LSTM [17], Residual Neural Network
(ResNet) [18], and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [19]
have been adopted for solving data-driven forecasting-aided
SE in smart grids. In the later techniques, measurement data
are fed as the input to the models either as multivariate
time-series or images in Euclidean space. The aforementioned
techniques do not explicitly consider the information about the
underlying graph structures in the system data. Particularly,
CNN generally handles data in Euclidean space and fails to
address non-Euclidean spaces created by graphs; especially
when there is no spatial locality due to the arbitrary structure
of the graph [20].
This step along with integrating the temporal dependencies
in the data for one-step ahead prediction of the system’s state
can be modeled as
Zt = f1 (.)Xt ,
Xt+1 = f2 (.)Xt ,
(2)
(3)
where f1 (.) and f2 (.) are nonlinear functions of state
variables Xt that will be learnt from the measurement data.
Particularly, the function f1 (.) maps the measurements to the
system state, and f2 (.) does the one-step ahead forecasting.
Instead of learning two separate nonlinear relationships, both
functions can be combined into one mapping function F (.) as
Xt+1 = F (Zt , Xt ). In this work, a two layer spatio-temporal
G-CNN is used to learn the mapping function F . Since power
system measurements are highly correlated multivariate time-
series, to capture the spatial dependencies, a graph convolution
layer with message passing is used as the first layer of
the network. The second layer is a GRU layer, which is
responsible for capturing the temporal dependencies of the
measurements.
In this case, the assumption is that measurements are
available only at a subset of buses (i.e., at n ∈ N o ), which can
be identified, for instance, using a PMU placement strategy to
ensure full observability of the system. In this work, three
PMU placement strategies for the IEEE 118 bus system have
been adopted and considered from [36] as shown in Table I
to evaluate the performance of the presented SE technique
for different availability of the measurements. Note that the
measurement at the rest of the buses are modeled as white
Gaussian noise, which can, for instance, represent the channel
noise. The SE process in this case will estimate the state of
all the nodes from the available measurements of N o buses
along with one-step ahead state prediction.
In this work, a data-driven approach based on G-CNN is
presented for the SE problem in smart grids. Since G-CNNs
are deep learning-based methods that operate on the graph
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Technical University of Athens (NTUA).
Downloaded on January 04,2022 at 08:17:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions
apply.domain, they lend themselves well to the problem of SE in
smart grids with underlying graph-based structures and inter-
actions. In this work, a modified variant of G-CNN, namely
temporal G-CNN (T-GCN), suitable for analyses of graph
time-series, is presented for one-step ahead state prediction in
smart grids. The T-GCN model can deal with complex spatial
dependencies over graphs as well as temporal dynamics in
the measurements. Specifically, a message passing G-CNN is
used to capture the topological structure of the smart grid
network in the spatial dependency analyses and the gated
recurrent units are used to capture the dynamic variation of
state information for obtaining the temporal dependencies. The
performance evaluation of the presented method for two cases
of full measurement availability and availability of a subset
of measurements in comparison with some of the existing SE
techniques shows better accuracy, low latency and faster data
processing, which can result in improved wide-area monitoring
for smart grids.
In this work, a data-driven approach based on G-CNN is
presented for the SE problem in smart grids. Since G-CNNs
are deep learning-based methods that operate on the graph
domain, they lend themselves well to the problem of SE in
smart grids with underlying graph-based structures and inter-
actions. In this work, a modified variant of G-CNN, namely
temporal G-CNN (T-GCN), suitable for analyses of graph
time-series, is presented for one-step ahead state prediction in
smart grids. The T-GCN model can deal with complex spatial
dependencies over graphs as well as temporal dynamics in
the measurements. Specifically, a message passing G-CNN is
used to capture the topological structure of the smart grid
network in the spatial dependency analyses and the gated
recurrent units are used to capture the dynamic variation of
state information for obtaining the temporal dependencies. The
performance evaluation of the presented method for two cases
of full measurement availability and availability of a subset
of measurements in comparison with some of the existing SE
techniques shows better accuracy, low latency and faster data
processing, which can result in improved wide-area monitoring
for smart grids.



13. Time-Synchronized State Estimation Using Graph
Neural Networks in Presence of Topology Changes

Abstract—Recently, there has been a major emphasis on devel-
oping data-driven approaches involving machine learning (ML)
for high-speed static state estimation (SE) in power systems. The
emphasis stems from the ability of ML to overcome difficulties
associated with model-based approaches, such as handling of non-
Gaussian measurement noise. However, topology changes pose a
stiff challenge for performing ML-based SE because the training
and test environments become different when such changes occur.
This paper overcomes this challenge by formulating a graph
neural network-based time-synchronized state estimator that
considers the physical connections of the power system during
the training itself. The superiority of the proposed approach over
the model-based linear state estimator in the presence of non-
Gaussian measurement noise, and a regular deep neural network-
based state estimator in the presence of topology changes is
demonstrated for the IEEE 118-bus system.
Static state estimation (SE) is performed in modern en-
ergy management systems to enhance situational awareness
of power system operators. In static SE, the state refers to
the voltage magnitudes and angles of all the vertices of the
power system graph. For the transmission system, which is
the focus of this paper, the vertices are the buses inside
substations. In the past decade, intelligent electronic devices
(IEDs) called phasor measurement units (PMUs) have been
placed in bulk inside the substations to the effect that many
transmission systems are completely, and often redundantly,
observed by these devices (e.g., see Fig. 1 of [1]). PMUs
rely on the global positioning system to provide time-stamped
measurements, also known as synchrophasor measurements.
Therefore, estimation performed using measurements that are
synchronized in time is termed time-synchronized estimation.
Linear state estimation (LSE) is a time-synchronized estima-
tion in power systems in which the static states are estimated
using only using data from PMUs. Outputs of linear state
estimators are preferred over those of supervisory control and
data acquisition (SCADA)-based state estimators because of
the former’s high speed (typically 30 samples/second) and
time-synchronized nature. When a system is fully observed by
PMUs, LSE is performed by solving the following equation:
In this paper, we investigate if an alternate DNN architec-
ture, namely, graph neural networks (GNNs), can continue to
perform accurate and consistent SE after a topology change
and without any subsequent re-training. GNN is an ML model
that works on non-Euclidean data defined as a graph [9]. The
inputs of a GNN are the node feature and adjacency matrices
which contain the node and connectivity information of the
graph, respectively. By employing graph-structured data, one
can incorporate physical information of the system into the
learning process of the GNN [10]. Hence, the GNN’s learning
process includes knowledge of the data (features) and the
topology of the system. This makes GNNs distinct from other
ML models and more suited for handling topology changes.
In this paper, similar to [14], we first place PMUs optimally
to obtain a fully-observed node feature matrix; however, we
do not create a separate factor-graph (the reason is given
in Section II). Then, we build a GNN in which the phys-
ical connections of the power system are embedded using
multiple convolution layers and important node features are
extracted via an attention layer, to perform high-speed time-
synchronized SE. Finally, we demonstrate the robustness of
the proposed GNN-based state estimator compared with the
state-of-the-art for high-speed SE, namely, model-based LSE
and regular DNN-based SE, in terms of handling non-Gaussian
measurement noise and topology changes, respectively.
If PMUs are only placed on some of the nodes of the system,
there will be missing features in X. We overcome this problem
by placing PMUs such that all the nodes either have PMUs on
them or are adjacent to at least one node that has a PMU on it.
Such optimal locations can be determined from prior literature
on optimal PMU placement for LSE (e.g., [15]). Note that
loss of PMU data can result in the feature matrix becoming
unobservable. Contrary to creating a separate factor-graph to
overcome this issue as done in [14], we suggest detecting and
replacing bad/missing PMU data before it enters the GNN as
already done for regular DNNs in [16].
Graph Convolution Network (GCN): GCN is used to exploit
topology information in the system graph by aggregating
weighted features in the neighborhood of every node. It is
mathematically defined as:


(k−1)
X
xu


(4)
x(k)
W (k) p
v =σ
|N
(v)||N (u)|
u∈N (v)∪{v}
where, xv and xu are rows of X corresponding to nodes v and
u, respectively, σ is the rectified linear-unit (ReLU) activation
function, W is the learnable weight matrix, |N (v)| and |N (u)|
are the number of nodes in the neighborhood of v and u,
respectively, and k = 1, 2, . . . , K refers to the different hidden
layers of the GNN. In each iteration of (4), features of every
node are updated by propagating the weighted features of its
neighboring nodes to capture the physical connections of the
power system graph.
Graph Attention Network (GAT): GAT is used to add
importance to specific messages from neighbors of each node
in the graph, as opposed to GCN, where all the messages are
treated as equally important. A GAT is formulated as:


X


x(k)
αvu W (k) x(k−1)
(5)
u
v =σ
u∈N (v)∪{v}
where, αvu is the level of importance of neighboring node u’s
message to node v, and is calculated as:
exp(evu )
u∈N (v)∪{v} exp(evu )
αvu = P
(6)
where the attention coefficient, evu , is given by,
evu = σleaky (aT [W (k) x(k−1)
k W (k) x(k−1)
])
v
u
(7)
In (7), k refers to the concatenation operation, and σleaky is
the leaky-ReLU activation function. GAT adds the learnable
parameter “a” to learn the attention (importance) across pairs
of nodes during the training process.
GAT is its ability to assign different levels of importance to
different neighbors and obtain a better feature representation
for each node, thereby improving estimation performance.
The matrices X and A are the inputs to the GNN model, and
the state variables (noise-free voltage magnitudes and angles)
are the outputs. The GNN structure comprises five GCN and
one GAT layer (i.e., a total of six hidden layers), where the
GCN layers extract the topology-based information (physical
connections), while the GAT layer learns the importance of
neighborhood information within the graph. The number of
epochs, learning rate, and optimizer are 1,000, 0.001, and
Adam, respectively. The test data comprises 4,000 distinct
graph samples for every topology (see Section III-D regarding
how the different topologies were created).
In this paper, a time-synchronized GNN-based SE frame-
work is presented to estimate the static states of the power
system. The framework combines GCN and GAT layers ac-
count for the physical connections of the system. The proposed
approach is compared with LSE and a regular DNN-based SE
in presence of non-Gaussian measurement noise and topology
changes. The results indicate that by using convolution and
attention layers, the GNN trained for the base topology is
able to perform robust estimation under different system and
sensing conditions without any ex post facto learning.
The application of GNNs to power systems is still in its
infancy. As such, more research is expected to be conducted
in this area in the near future. We are currently exploring the
ability of the proposed GNN-based state estimator to handle
bad/missing PMU data. We also plan to extend the proposed
research by using feature augmentation techniques in order to
reduce the number of PMUs needed for satisfying the fully-
observed node feature matrix requirement.


14. A multi-rate sampling PMU-based event classification in active distribution
grids with spectral graph neural network

Phasor measurement units (PMUs) are time-synchronized measurement devices that have been proliferated in
transmission networks during the last two decades. Recently, there have been efforts to bring this technology
to distribution grids for different applications such as three-phase state estimation, fault and event analyses,
and phase identification. Streamed time-synchronized voltage and current phasor data can be used for events
classification and region identification along distribution feeders to determine the type and location of events,
which are important features of any fault and event detection, location, and isolation software. In this paper,
the spectral theory-based graph convolution is used for event classification and region identification. The
proposed model uses modified graph convolution filters to aggregate the regional multi-rate samples of PMU
data, i.e., voltage magnitude and angles from several nodes. Besides these temporal data of the measured nodes,
the physical configuration of the network containing edge features are given to the graph convolution network
(GCN) to not only classify the event type, but also identify the affected region and location. The proposed
graph-based method is tested on a standard test system with capacitor and distributed energy resources-related
events, malfunction of voltage regulator, sudden load changes, and different types of faults. The results are
compared with baseline methods, Chebyshev graph neural network (GNN), decision tree, logistic regression
and K-nearest neighbor using the accuracy, recall, precision and F-1 score metrics. Furthermore, performance
sensitivity analysis is carried out with respect to the number of installed PMUs, measurement noise level, size
of available historical data, availability of network edge features, and different designs of GNN.
Phasor measurement units (PMUs) are time-synchronized sensor
technologies that have been successfully deployed in transmission net-
works for variety of applications [1], from state estimation to faults and
events detection, classification, and localization [2]. On the other hand,
these measurement devices have not been implemented on distribution
grids at large-scale yet. Historically, it has not been cost-effective to
equip passive distribution feeders with such advanced sensors such as
PMUs [3]. However, due to the increasing penetration of distributed en-
ergy resources (DERs) and flexible loads, distribution grids are becom-
ing more active compared to the past [4]. The increasing penetration
level of DERs brings new challenges for developing more effective and
efficient monitoring, protection, and control methods for the evolving
grids. Therefore, there is an increasing need for equipping distribution
networks with more advanced sensors, such as PMUs, to better provide
network and asset situational awareness, such as events analysis [5].
Active distribution grids are susceptible to experience different
events which might cause damage to the assets. Hence, it is crucial
to analyze the events, including identifying their type and location. A
prompt event analysis framework can mitigate the adverse consequence
of an event, leading to improvement in grid reliability and resilience.
There have been many studies about fault and events analysis in
power distribution networks using different methods. Recently, ma-
chine learning-based (ML) methods have been widely used for events
and fault analysis in distribution networks. In [10], measured voltages
are used as inputs to a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to
specify the fault types. Authors of [11] propose the use of SVM for
fault classification and deep neural network for fault location. Ref. [12]
classifies faults and cyber attacks, and specifies the location of the oc-
curred incident in distribution grids using deep neural network (DNN).
In [13], a fault classification method is proposed via a latent structure
learning under a multi-task learning algorithm to perform an accurate
classification with limited labeled data. Authors of [14] propose a
pattern recognition technique for fault detection in transmission grids
by selecting the primitive patterns in recorded waveform signals. In this
study, the attribute grammar is deployed for feature extraction as it can
handle semantic and syntactic information [15]
Graph neural network (GNN) is proposed to capture spatial–
temporal features of PMU data for event classification and region
identification at sub-circuit level in distribution feeders. Potential
events such as capacitor banks (CBs) switching, DER outages,
sudden load changes, malfunctioning of tap changes in VRs, and
all nodal short-circuit faults are considered and studied in a stan-
dard distribution test system. The proposed GNN-based method
assists system operators to effectively determine events type and
region leading to enhancement in network and assets situational
awareness.
• The proposed method is developed to process multi-rate PMU
data captured at different locations. Measurement devices with
different sampling rates bring new challenges in simultaneous
processing of data toward each specific application such as event
classification. A multi-rate data fusion is appropriately adopted,
making the proposed method applicable to real-world conditions
where sensors with different sampling rates might be available.
Moreover, the physical distance between PMUs and the configu-
ration of the network is defined as a weighted adjacency matrix
of a graph representing the distribution grid, and used as a prior
knowledge in the classification problem.
• We use an efficient layer-wise linear filter of GCN, which is
obtained by the first order approximation of spectral graph con-
volution [29]. Moreover, this model is not limited to the explicit
parameterization given by Chebyshev polynomial, and is more
efficient in terms of computation time and convergence rate. Also,
the proposed linear GNN (L-GNN) gives a desired classification ac-
curacy compared to Chebyshev-GNN (C-GNN), constructed with
Chebyshev filter, and other conventional machine learning (ML)
methods.


15. Optimal Phasor Measurement Unit Placement
Using Machine Learning Technique

Abstract— The Phasor Measurement Unit (PMU) plays a
massive role in dynamic monitoring and wide-area protection of
the power system. Although installing PMU on each bus makes
sense, it is unrealistic due to the high cost and unnecessary.
Given these circumstances, academia and industry have been
researching to find the best algorithm for Optimal Phasor
Measurement Unit Placement (OPP). The OPP is primarily
driven by economic and observability issues, among others.
Traditionally, all OPP strategies frame OPP as an optimization
problem and use various optimization algorithms to find the
best solution. In this paper, a Machine Learning (ML) technique
based on a data-driven approach is investigated. The proposed
novel algorithm makes use of the Real-time Simulator (OPAL-
RT) to extract data and the Random Forest Method to detect the
physical anomaly in the power system. The results are further
processed to find the best solution for PMU placement. The
proposed approach is applied in the IEEE 9-bus system to
validate its effectiveness. The regression technique is used to
verify the ability of the approach to maximize the observability
of the entire system.
In this paper, a data-driven approach is proposed for OPP.
To the author’s knowledge, there have been no studies on the
possible application of RF based algorithm for OPP. Various
faults are simulated in HYPERSIM to extract the data for the
Machine Learning (ML) model. The data is preprocessed and
fed to the Random Forest (RF) classifier. The results are
further processed to find the OPP. The proposed method is
applied to standard test systems to show its realistic and
practical effectiveness by validating the presented results with
other methods. The research paper is organized as follows.
The various OPP techniques are discussed in Section II.
Section III expands the cost function presented in [11] to
include more realistic costs that come with the PMU
installation. Section IV describes the physical anomaly in the
electric grid briefly. Section V explains Random Forest
Method, followed by the methodology to implement the
proposed algorithm in Section VI. Section VII contains the
application of the proposed algorithm in the IEEE 9-bus
system and a comparison of various contemporary ML
techniques for physical anomaly detection. Section VIII
includes limitations and future work to improve the proposed
algorithm. Finally, Section IX concludes the paper.
In addition, the OPP was treated as an optimization
problem, but the proposed algorithm uses the data-driven
approach using a real-time simulator (OPAL-RT) and
Machine Learning technique, specifically Random Forest
(RF) method, with due consideration to physical anomaly
detection and critical variable identification.
In this paper, a Random forest-based algorithm is
presented for the optimal positioning of the PMU units. The
proposed algorithm is a data-driven approach to the OPP
problem. The implementation requires modeling and data
extraction from the Real-time Simulator. A complete
framework to solve the OPP problem and its viability is
demonstrated in the IEEE 9-bus system. The Random Forest
classifier provided an average fault recognition accuracy of
99.988% and a state prediction accuracy of 99.397%. The
proposed approach for physical anomaly detection was also
compared against other popular ML methods like SoftMax,
SVM, and Multiple logistic regression, and the results
revealed that the RF is relatively more efficient for fault
classification. The OPP for IEEE 9-bus for the proposed
approach gives comparable results to the several optimization
techniques.
The phasor value obtained from the PMU on the
HYPERSIM model is purely sinusoidal, so the accuracy of
the ML model is very high. Although the Gaussian noise is
added along with the standardization of the dataset, it is not
an actual representation of a real-life scenario where signals
consist of many noise signals and are distorted. Moreover,
communication is affected by various factors such as harsh
terrain, distance, signal propagation, and latency. Therefore,
the actual implementation of the proposed algorithm will
have greater confidence if we can accurately model all the
electric layers and perform a co-simulation with the network-
emulating software. The proposed algorithm is implemented
in the IEEE 9-bus system. Although RF is widely considered
scalable due to bootstrap bagging, the proposed algorithm
must be tested on a higher bus benchmark system. While the
number of simulations and data preprocessing time will be
larger for higher bus systems, the algorithm should run on
state-of-the-art machines to reduce the algorithm's overall
execution time.
In this paper, a Random forest-based algorithm is
presented for the optimal positioning of the PMU units. The
proposed algorithm is a data-driven approach to the OPP
problem. The implementation requires modeling and data
extraction from the Real-time Simulator. A complete
framework to solve the OPP problem and its viability is
demonstrated in the IEEE 9-bus system. The Random Forest
classifier provided an average fault recognition accuracy of
99.988% and a state prediction accuracy of 99.397%. The
proposed approach for physical anomaly detection was also
compared against other popular ML methods like SoftMax,
SVM, and Multiple logistic regression, and the results
revealed that the RF is relatively more efficient for fault
classification. The OPP for IEEE 9-bus for the proposed
approach gives comparable results to the several optimization
techniques.

16. State Estimation for Power Distribution System
using Graph Neural Networks

Abstract-State estimation is critical to maintaining system
stability and reliability as it enables real-time monitoring of
the power system operation and facilitates fault detection,
minimizing the risk of power outages and improving overall
system performance. This paper presents a state estimation
method based on graph neural networks, aiming to improve time
efficiency and extended observability. Graph neural networks can
aggregate information and dependencies from voltage and power
measurement at the critical buses, making them more effective
for state estimation on non-grid structured data. The IEEE 123-
bus system is used as a case study to evaluate comprehensively
the state estimation performance. The proposed model provides
a better performance for mapping measurement data with states
compared to other neural networks.
As a highly complex cyber-physical system, a smart grid is
composed of power electronic devices, a power infrastructure
and a communication network. Phasor Measurement Units
(PMU s) initially collect physical data before sending it to
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Systems (SCADA).
The measurement data is then sent by the communication
network to the application level, where the power applications
are processed and assessed [1]. The main objective is to deter-
mine the state of the system based on the measurement data,
ensuring the trustworthiness of the cyber-physical pipeline.
Data from micro phasor measuring units (PMU) is analyzed
by using many state estimate schemes proposed in literature
[3]-[11]. In general, these schemes can be categorized into
two groups: model-based methods and data-driven methods.
Model-based techniques are developed from physical equa-
tions which are relationships between power system mea-
surements and states. Conventionally, the state-space model
equations of power networks can be studied to provide better
awareness for the static state estimation (SSE) or dynamic state
estimation (DSE) algorithms [12]. DSE can track state values
well, even in the load-change cases and identify bad data using
a weighted least square or chi-square method. However, DSE
is only reliant on precise dynamic system models, which may
not always be observable in some situations [13]. Therefore,
with the rapid advancement of state estimation techniques,
large research groups are shifting to data-driven approaches.
Data-driven methods have recently emerged as an appealing
research direction because they do not rely on physical equa-
tions to perform state estimation [2]. The primary trend in
these methods involves leveraging artificial neural networks
to describe either part of or the entire power system. This
is achieved through training vast amounts of data collected
from different sources. These ANN-based techniques capture
functional patterns from power systems and encode them as
node parameters. This method enhances the robustness of state
estimation against inaccurate measurements by leveraging
either a neural network or a parallel distributed processing
model. In addition to ANNs, kernel-weighted neighbors and
kernel function methods have also been utilized for grid
current-state estimation [2].
The contributions of this paper are twofold: the proposed
scheme can track well changes of state values including
voltage magnitude and phase angle in load-change cases; com-
prehensive studies and comparisons among different neural
networks such as Multi-layer Perception, Convolutional Neural
Network, and Graph Convolutional Network are also provided.
n this paper, we proposed an innovative solution to state
estimation in power distribution systems. The datasets for
studying load-change cases in the IEEE 123-bus feeder system
were generated using the Opal-RT simulation and can be
leveraged for future research purposes. The numerical results
show that the GCN model outperforms other state-of-the-art
methods on the same dataset, demonstrating its great potential
for exploiting spatio-temporal patterns from the graph datasets.
Additionally, it enables faster training, improved convergence,
reduced parameter count, as well as flexibility and scalability
by hyper-parameter tuning techniques. In the future, we will
modify the deep learning framework to specifically integrate
the system's physical information. Moreover, the effect of
reduced measurements and noises should also be examined.

17. A Machine Learning Approach to Meter Placement
for Power Quality Estimation in Smart Grid

bstract—Due to the high-measuring cost, the monitoring of
power quality (PQ) is nontrivial. This paper is aimed at reducing
the cost of PQ monitoring in power network. Using a real-world
PQ dataset, this paper adopts a learn-from-data approach to
obtain a device latent feature model, which captures the device
behavior as a PQ transition function. With the latent feature
model, the power network could be modeled, in analogy, as a
data-driven network, which presents the opportunity to use the
well-investigated network monitoring and data estimation algo-
rithms to solve the network quality monitoring problem in power
grid. Based on this network model, algorithms are proposed to
intelligently place measurement devices on suitable power links to
reduce the uncertainty of PQ estimation on unmonitored power
links. The meter placement algorithms use entropy-based mea-
surements and Bayesian network models to identify the most
suitable power links for PQ meter placement. Evaluation results
on various simulated networks including IEEE distribution test
feeder system show that the meter placement solution is efficient,
and has the potential to significantly reduce the uncertainty of
PQ values on unmonitored power links.
With devices’ latent features captured, we in the second
step introduce a network model which represents the smart
microgrid as a data-driven network. In analogy, we represent
the electrical components as network nodes, power links as
data links, and flow of power as data flow on the links. This
problem transformation significantly simplifies the complex-
ity of the power network; it also presents the opportunity to
use the well-investigated network monitoring and data esti-
mation algorithms to solve the network quality monitoring
problem.
Finally, we solve the intelligent meter placement problem
by proposing an iterative approach for identifying network
segments suitable for power meter placement. During each
iteration of the algorithm, we identify in a greedy manner the
network segment whose PQ is most unpredictable given the
meters placed so far. We then place the next power meter
at that location. In summary, this paper makes the following
contributions.
1) A network model for PQ estimation, based on the device
latent features that are learned from a real-world dataset.
2) An intelligent entropy-based algorithm and a Bayesian
network (BN)-based approach to solve the meter place-
ment problem.
On the fourth aspect, there is a great body of work on the
problem of optimal sensor placement [12]. In the context of
power networks, optimal placement of phasor measurement
units (PMU) has been studied [13]. Reference [14] shows
that adding few extra PMUs could improve the bad data
detection in the network state estimation. A relevant work
addressing the problem of distribution system state estimation
was proposed [15] to minimize the state estimation errors. The
optimal PMU placement and its communication infrastructure
was designed [16] to address the problem of state estimation.
A procedure finding the optimal trade-offs between PMUs and
metering devices for distribution state estimation was investi-
gated in [17]. Nevertheless, we have not seen any work on
studying optimal meter placement problem in the context of
network-wide PQ estimation. Further, there are three major
differences between the existing PMU placement algorithms
and our algorithm.
1) We focus on distribution networks at the enterprise level
(e.g., a university campus).
2) Our method is data driven and is based on statistical
machine learning method.
3) The existing PMU placement algorithms address the
problem of estimating network states and do not con-
sider PQ estimation explicitly.
The objective of this paper is to reduce the cost of PQ mon-
itoring by intelligently placing PQ meters on selected links in
the power network. After deploying limited number of meters,
we should be able to estimate the PQ values on unmonitored
links as accurately as possible. A candidate link for meter
placement is the one whose PQ is the most uncertain. The
challenge here is how to identify the most uncertain links.
Clearly, the PQ values on any power link is dependent on
the physical characteristics of the electric devices. For exam-
ple, the PQ at the output link of a UPS is more predictable
than that of a switch. Hence, we need to know the behav-
ior of each device in the network. We call the behavior of a
device its latent feature or simply a transition function, which
is usually estimated through physical modeling or through the
assessment of historical power monitoring data.
This section describes a BN-based algorithm for select-
ing locations for placing power meters in a power grid. The
approach uses Monte Carlo (MC) sampling and probabilistic
inference approaches to identify locations in the power grid
which exhibit unpredictable PQ events
The problem is inherently challenging as the information
received from a power meter flows not only the forward direc-
tion from the root nodes toward the leaf nodes, but also in
reverse or upstream direction toward the root node (utility
main) and back to all other nodes in the network.
To tackle the above challenge, we cast the problem as a
BN and model the power grid using a factor graph. Several
message passing algorithms could be used to help us determine
the optimal meter placement. We chose the belief propagation
or sum-product algorithm [18], since it is well understood and
has been shown to work for general topologies [19] including
tree networks.
Q meters are expensive devices and it is financially infea-
sible to install them on every link in the power network. We
proposed algorithms which intelligently place power meters on
selected power links to reduce the cost of PQ monitoring. We
formulated the problem of selecting suitable meter placements
in power networks such that PQ can be best predicted. Two
approaches were presented, one based on CE and one con-
sidering prediction error. Experiments in various simulation
networks including the IEEE 13-node distribution test feeder
suggested that the CE-based MinEntropy approach is much
faster. Finally, the proposed solutions significantly reduce the
uncertainty of PQ values on unmonitored power links.


18. Optimal Placement of PMUs & Analytics on PMU Data using ANN Technique

Abstract—Power system play a vital role in human life. The
reliability of these power systems depends on the operating
constraints & conditions. PMU (Phasor measurement units)
utilizes synchronization signals provided by the GPS (global
positioning system) satellites and deliver the voltage and currents
phasors measured at a given node. To avoid the redundant use of
PMUs, the optimal locations for the PMUs must be determined.
The main objective of this research paper is to place a minimal
number of PMUs, so that the system can be effectively observable
& the implementation for on-line estimation of the power system
and for security monitoring.
The ANN technique utilizes synchrophasor is to carry out the
contingency analysis by calculating the sensitivity factors. The
same thing is verified with the help of Fast Decoupled Load Flow
(FDLF), in MATLAB environment and contingency ranking is
made. This method is very much effective in ranking the
contingencies of a electrical power system. This was tried on
IEEE-14 Bus system & the results were found to be effective.
Topological observability uses the graph theoretical
concepts to find the positions for calculations, placements and
hence, for making the system topologically observable. Clear
information of PMU based topological observability is
explained in this section.
PMU based Topological Observability:
The following simple rules stated below are put together to
make the system topologically observable using PMUs,
1. If phasor information of voltage and current are known
at one end of a branch, then voltage phasor at another end of
the branch can be evaluated by Ohm’s law.
2. When voltage phasors at two different ends of a branch
are known, branch current can be evaluated.
3. When zero injection bus is present with no PMU, and
only one unknown outgoing current, then that current can be
computed using Kirchhoff’s Current Law (KCL).
This paper has suggested a simple Programming based
method for the optimal placement of PMUs to ensure
complete topological observability of the system. The
contingency selection and ranking which are important for
contingency analysis have been done by calculating
performance index PI by two different methods & compared.
The PI is calculated for IEEE 14 bus systems using the Fast
Decoupled Load Flow (FDLF) algorithm and also by using
Feed forward- Backward Propogation Neural Network in
MATLAB environment.
The proposed observability and controllability analysis has
been tested on the IEEE 14-bus system. The proposed method
is quite effective and simple to adopt. The contingency
selection by ANN proves to be efficient in terms of accuracy
and time.


19. Real-Time Faulted Line Localization and PMU Placement in Power Systems Through Convolutional Neural Networks

Abstract—Diverse fault types, fast reclosures, and complicated
transient states after a fault event make real-time fault location
in power grids challenging. Existing localization techniques in this
area rely on simplistic assumptions, such as static loads, or require
much higher sampling rates or total measurement availability. This
paper proposes a faulted line localization method based on a convo-
lutional neural network (CNN) classifier using bus voltages. Unlike
prior data-driven methods, the proposed classifier is based on fea-
tures with physical interpretations that improve the robustness of
the location performance. The accuracy of our CNN-based local-
ization tool is demonstrably superior to other machine learning
classifiers in the literature. To further improve the location perfor-
mance, a joint phasor measurement units placement strategy are
proposed and validated against other methods. A significant as-
pect of our methodology is that under very low observability (7%
of buses), the algorithm is still able to localize the faulted line to
a small neighborhood with high probability. The performance of
our scheme is validated through simulations of faults of various
types in the IEEE 39-bus and 68-bus power systems under vary-
ing uncertain conditions, system observability, and measurement
quality.
The main contributions are summarized from four aspects:
1) The feature vector with clear physical interpretations is de-
fined (Section II-B). With this feature as input, the complexity of
the CNN classifier is largely reduced, compared with the classic
ones with millions of parameters [15], [16]. Moreover, faults can
be located within the small neighborhood of the faulted point
when a limited number of buses are measured (Section V-D
and V-E). 2) The four-layer CNN classifier is motivated due to
the property of sparse connectivity and capturing local features
(Section III). The advantages of CNN are illustrated by the com-
parison with other types of classifiers (Section V-C). 3) A PMU
placement algorithm is proposed based on the loss function of
the CNN classifier, and its localization performance is shown
to be improved compared with other random or topology-based
methods (Section IV and V-F). 4) The significance of the local-
ization scheme lies in its robustness to practical scenarios with
differing load variations (Section V-G), noise (Section V-H), and
voltage quality (Section V-I).
CNN is preferred mainly considering three reasons: (1) The
convolution operation in CNN generates sparse connectivity be-
tween the entries of different layers [23], which is more suitable
than the fully connected operation for the sparse vector ψ̄ (ex-
plained in Section II-B). (2) CNN reveals the local features [23].
The small size of the kernels strengthens CNN to learn the lo-
cal features instead of the global features. As the neighborhood
property of ψ̄ (presented in Section II-B) illustrates the local
characteristics, CNN has the advantages of learning the neigh-
borhood property from the input. (3) In addition, the experimen-
tal comparison results (discussed in Section V-C) of different
classifiers further confirm our analysis, and the CNN shows the
advantages especially when the system is partially measured.
In the next Section, we describe how correct PMU placement
helps to reduce fault localization error with partial observability
and improves the performance of the CNN.
We propose a data-driven placement algorithm that is aware of
both the fault localization and the learning mechanism (opti-
mization of the loss function of CNN). To optimize the PMU
placement for fault location, the optimal set S can be obtained
by minimizing loss function (18) satisfying (19) during the train-
ing stage. The regularization item Θ2F reduces the model com-
plexity by creating a parameter set Θ of a small norm.
To find the optimal set S of size K is an NP-complete prob-
lem, thus we propose an algorithm to greedily increase the num-
ber of measured buses until the total number K is reached in
Algorithm 1.
Given the total number of measured buses K, this algorithm
greedily increases the size of the set S from the initial set S0
one by one until K, where S0 includes a few buses having the
largest degree di or being significantly crucial. For each step,
the set S is updated by adding the i∗ th bus that minimizes the
loss function li plus the item of β/di . Note that the item β/di
is added to the loss function to account for the effect of grid
topology in determining the selected bus. The weight coefficient
β ∈ (0, 1) adjusts the significance of the bus degree and of the
loss function to prioritize the buses with a large degree. This
item takes effect obviously when the set S is large, and the
difference of the loss function li becomes small. Meanwhile,
a number of experimental results show that adding a bus with
more considerable degree tends to have better performances.
Based on all of the above, our algorithm tries to enforce the
n this Subsection, we discuss the performance of the algo-
rithm 1 for PMU placement. The proposed algorithm is com-
pared with the “2-hop Vertex Cover (VC)” and the Random
placement algorithms. The “2-hop VC” is a topology-based al-
gorithm for PMU placement [33]. It places PMUs on a set of
buses such that each edge in the graph is at most two hops away
from a PMU. The baseline of the Random algorithm selects ar-
bitrarily s buses. The LARs for faults of the four tested types
are compared in Fig. 7 where the measured buses are suggested
by the three placement algorithms.
As there are at least 12 buses that can satisfy the ob-
jective of “2-hop vertex cover” for this 68-bus power sys-
tem, these three algorithms are compared when s = 12. The
12 buses selected by the Random algorithm include SR =
[31, 3, 65, 46, 43, 28, 15, 44, 23, 58, 9, 57], one solution of the 2-
hop VC algorithm is obtained by solving a linear programming
approximating the 2-hop VC formulation, and the selected buses
are SV C = [3, 6, 13, 19, 23, 26, 30, 31, 36, 40, 44, 52], and the
12 buses selected by the method proposed in the manuscript are
SP = [1, 9, 16, 30, 36, 23, 42, 61, 51, 57, 6, 37]. Compared with
the Random algorithm, the improvements of the proposed algo-
rithm for the different types of faults varies, but it shows about
10% improvement in average over the other methods. The 2-
hop VC method also has higher LARs than that of the Random
algorithm, but it is still lagging behind the proposed algorithm
showing the average improvement of 8%.
The running time of the proposed PMU placement algorithm
is 5.4 hours based on the personal computer of Intel i7, 3.6 GHz
CPU and 32 GB RAM, and this process can be accomplished
offline. The running time of testing one dataset is 4 ms, thus the
proposed CNN classifier can efficiently determine the location
of the faults in real-time.
This manuscript proposes to locate the faulted line by a CNN
classifier through the use of physically interpretable feature vec-
tors. The clear physical interpretations of these feature vectors
are explained based on the substitution theory. The benefits of
employing these features have three aspects: 1) a high location
accuracy rate is reached even when the system has low observ-
ability; 2) the true faulted line, even if not the highest, has a high
output probability (among top-k, if not the highest) from the clas-
sifier in low observability; 3) the misclassified lines output by
the classifier mostly are geographically near the faulted line. The
location performance is further increased by using the design of
the CNN classifier into a joint PMU placement algorithm, that
is demonstrably superior to other random and topology-based
methods. The significance of the proposed faulted line localiza-
tion method over other methods is revealed in the robustness to
different conditions, including variant random load fluctuations,
noise, inaccurate voltage measurements in the IEEE 39-bus and
68-bus power systems.
In the future, we will extend this work to the distribution
system and identify the exact location of the fault along the line.
Furthermore, testing the methodology on real-data (as opposed
to synthetically generated data) is another direction for our
future work.


20) Prediction of voltage distribution using deep learning and identified key
smart meter locations

The energy landscape for the Low-Voltage (LV) networks is undergoing rapid changes. These changes are
driven by the increased penetration of distributed Low Carbon Technologies, both on the generation side
(i.e. adoption of micro-renewables) and demand side (i.e. electric vehicle charging). The previously passive
‘fit-and-forget’ approach to LV network management is becoming increasing inefficient to ensure its effective
operation. A more agile approach to operation and planning is needed, that includes pro-active prediction and
mitigation of risks to local sub-networks (such as risk of voltage deviations out of legal limits).
The mass rollout of smart meters (SMs) and advances in metering infrastructure holds the promise
for smarter network management. However, many of the proposed methods require full observability, yet
the expectation of being able to collect complete, error free data from every smart meter is unrealistic in
operational reality. Furthermore, the smart meter (SM) roll-out has encountered significant issues, with the
current voluntary nature of installation in the UK and in many other countries resulting in low-likelihood of
full SM coverage for all LV networks. Even with a comprehensive SM roll-out privacy restrictions, constrain
data availability from meters. To address these issues, this paper proposes the use of a Deep Learning Neural
Network architecture to predict the voltage distribution with partial SM coverage on actual network operator
LV circuits. The results show that SM measurements from key locations are sufficient for effective prediction
of the voltage distribution, even without the use of the high granularity personal power demand data from
individual customers.
To address the challenges identified, this paper proposes a Deep
Learning Neural Network (DLNN) architecture to predict how voltage
is distributed on an LV circuit for one time step ahead using minimal
or key located smart meter data. We define an LV circuit as a group
of customers that share the same source (closed fuse at the secondary
substation). An LV network are a group of LV circuits within a specific
area. From the LV network operational perspective, the smart meter
data can indicate how voltage is distributed across the LV circuit. This
is beneficial to predict its likelihood of risks.
Due to the real-life limitations in the SM roll-out discussed in earlier
sections, for the DLNN to be a practical useful tool, our predictive
model must meet with the following features and aims:
1. Ability to predict the voltage distribution across a circuit one
time step ahead (t + τ) despite the partial SMs coverage in the
LV circuit
2. Ability to predict the voltage for all customers, including for
locations without any SMs
3. Ability to use, but not require high granularity power demand
data from all customers on the circuit, e.g. the potential use of
aggregated power demand data or no power data
4. No firm requirements of having customers’ phase connection
data for making predictions
Many PSSE methodologies will fall short as they are unable to meet
with the above features.
Low Voltage (LV) networks are a central element in the energy
transition, and will need to accommodate significant increases in Dis-
tributed Generation, Storage Technologies and increasingly, new de-
mand profiles, such as from decarbonised transport systems (i.e. EV
charging infrastructure). UK policy is setting aggressive timescales in
decarbonisation of energy and transport services, creating an urgency
in the need for advanced operational and planning capabilities for LV
networks. The previously passive ‘fit-and-forget’ approach to network
management will be inefficient to ensure their effective operation. An
adaptive approach is required that includes the prediction of risk to
the circuits. This has motivated the mass smart meter (SM) roll-out and
advance measurement infrastructure (AMI) installation in order to pro-
vide observability of how energy is distributed across the LV network,
specifically for the LV circuits beyond the secondary substation. Yet, the
majority of the Power System State Estimation (PSSE) tools developed
require full observability of the networks. Moreover, the majority of
the PSSE analysis methods described in literature also assumed that
100% of the customers on the network are with SM. This premise is
unrealistic in real-life operations. The current voluntary nature of the
SM installation has resulted in the low-likelihood of full SM coverage
for all the LV networks. This, together with privacy requirements,
which restrict the access of high granularity power demand data, have
resulted in the low uptake of many of the PSSE tools for LV network
analysis. In this landscape, big data is a key concern for the DNOs,
however big data comes with a high data management cost.
To address these concerns, in our research, we designed and eval-
uated the use of a novel Deep Learning Neural Network (DLNN) to
predict how voltage is distributed across an low voltage (LV) circuit,
despite the partial SM coverage on the LV circuit. The results show the
applicability of the DLNN to predict the voltage distribution, even at
locations without smart meter, and that with SM data at key locations
within the circuit is sufficient for effective prediction without requiring
high granularity power demand data.
Taking a longer-term view, such approaches will be increasingly
important for automating the data gathering and analysis activities of
distribution network operators going forward, and this research work
(and the broader NCEWS project it is part of) has been highlighted as
a key innovation project supporting the SP Energy Networks digitali-
sation agenda (c.f. [3], pg. 57). Overall, we conclude that state-of-the
art machine learning techniques, such as deep learning, can provide
significant benefits for power system operators in providing voltage
distribution predictions, while at the same time using only partial data
and respecting the privacy constraints of their customers.
In future work, we plan to explore several directions. First, we con-
sider applying our techniques to address other challenging problems for
power networks, such as phase identification for individual customers.
Second, we plan to explore a variety of other, more complex network
topologies, such as dense, ‘‘meshed’’ network topologies, present in
many industrial and urban environments. Finally, looking forward,
we plan to investigate the use of AI techniques combining ML and
data-analytic methods for network visibility/monitoring (such as those
presented in this paper), with those supporting planning decisions, for
example, how to design the sizing and placement of charging stations
to enable faster EV rollout.

21) Measurement Selection for Data-Driven Monitoring
of Distribution Systems

Abstract—This article investigates the problem of measure-
ment selection for data-driven monitoring approaches. Several
approaches to input variable selection (IVS) are analyzed, and a
general procedure for finding the optimal order for the selection
of candidate measurements is presented. The method is based
on the extensions of partial correlation and minimal redundancy
maximum relevance criteria to support IVS problems involving
multiple outputs. This method can be used to find the minimal set
of measurements for achieving a target estimation accuracy. The
results demonstrate the advantages and limits of the introduced
method in comparison to the other approaches discussed in this
article.
In model-based approaches, the monitoring involves the
measurements as inputs to a mathematical model of the system.
On one hand, the procedure used in these approaches usually
results in strict requirements, on which measurement must
be available given the model of the system so as to ensure
In model-based approaches, the monitoring involves the
measurements as inputs to a mathematical model of the system.
On one hand, the procedure used in these approaches usually
results in strict requirements, on which measurement must
be available given the model of the system so as to ensure
convergence. On the other hand, in most medium-voltage (MV)
low-voltage (LV) distribution systems, there are currently no
or only very few measurements available from the distribution
systems, especially at the LV level. This makes it difficult or even
impossible to effectively monitor the system, e.g., in terms of
model-based state estimation. In such cases, addition of further
measurements is necessary to enable monitoring. Although
so-called pseudomeasurements may enable state estimation
even with very few real measurements, they have a limited
potential to improve the estimation accuracy, which depends on
the assumptions used to generate the pseudomeasurements [4].
This means that the addition of real measurements is required in
many grids to enable grid monitoring. Nevertheless, additional
measurements are costly and must be selected in a careful way.
This article introduces four IVS procedures based on the con-
cepts of partial correlation (PC) and minimal redundancy max-
imum relevance (mRMR) for data-driven monitoring of power
distribution systems. These procedures can serve as guidelines
during the measurement infrastructure planning. They determine
the optimal subset of measurements to be used as input of
the data-driven voltage magnitude estimator in a step-by-step
manner, i.e., finding the next best input candidate at each step.
Input candidates can be any measurable quantity, including not
only electrical quantities such as voltage, current, and power
values, but also weather-related quantities. The heterogeneous
nature of the input candidates does not introduce any additional
complexity in the presented procedures. Furthermore, two of the
proposed IVS procedures completely work without any use of
the monitoring application and are thus completely model-free.
he goal is to define a procedure that finds that the optimal
selection order of the input candidates to the data-driven moni-
toring application achieves the highest estimation accuracy. The
estimated quantities in this article are the voltage magnitudes of
the nodes in a distribution system; for the sake of simplicity, in
the rest of this article, we will refer to this voltage magnitude
estimator simply as estimator.
The IVS methods can be categorized into model-based and
model-free (filter) approaches [18]. The model-based algo-
rithms, which are broadly divided into embedded and wrapper
approaches, consider an underlying preselected model for the
estimation process, i.e., an estimator, and directly optimize
some given performance indices of this estimator during the
IVS process. Therefore, their results rely on the performance of
their underlying estimator, and this makes them more vulnerable
to overfitting [19]. Furthermore, these methods, especially the
wrapper approach, can become computationally inefficient [19].
In contrast, model-free approaches do not assume a particular
estimator. So, the IVS problem is decoupled from the choice of
the estimator. However, if a reliable estimator model is available
and the computational burden is not a major concern in a given
application, inclusion of the knowledge about the estimator
might contribute to improved accuracy. Thus, this article focuses
on filter approaches. However, in addition to a model-free ex-
tension of a filter approach, a model-based (wrapper) extension
is also presented, and their performances are compared.
1) Partial Correlation: PC is a measure of the linear relation-
ship or association between two variables with the effect of one
or a set of variables removed from both of the variables. 
2)Concept of MI: MI is a measure of the amount of informa-
tion that two variables share. In other words, MI measures the
dependence or similarity between two variables.
3) mRMR Concept: The underlying idea of the mRMR
approach is to find a subset S of the input candidates yi ∈ Y with
m elements, which jointly have the highest dependence with
the target output among all subsets of input candidates with m
elements.
4) mRMR-Based IVS Procedure: It can be shown that
mRMR and maximum dependence criteria are equivalent if
a first-order forward selection (i.e., an incremental search) is
used for selection of input candidates [25].
Four procedures for deciding the selection order of the input
candidates in a data-driven estimation process involving mul-
tiple outputs are presented and compared. The AMO-PC and
AMO-mRMR methods are completely model-free and require
relatively low computational effort, but the selection orders
which they find does not lead to the fastest error reduction. In
contrast, the MMO-PC and MMO-mRMR rely on an estimator
model in the input selection process, which makes them compu-
tationally more demanding and vulnerable to estimator model
uncertainties. However, they outperform the other two methods
in finding the selection orders, which reduce the estimation
error in the quickest way if a suitable estimator model is used.
The AMO-PC and MMO-PC methods can be applied only to
linear problems, while the AMO-mRMR and MMO-mRMR
methods are applicable in a general case. As the studied prob-
lem of voltage magnitude estimation involves a predominantly
linear relationship between the majority of the defined input
candidates and the target outputs, the AMO-PC and MMO-PC
approaches perform satisfactorily. Nevertheless, in a general
case, the AMO-mRMR and MMO-mRMR approaches should
be used to obtain reliable results. The methods can support
distribution system operators’ decisions about the optimal or-
der for installing measurements to ensure the highest possible
estimation accuracy with any given number of measurements.
They can also be seamlessly applied to select the next best
input candidate when some measurements are available prior
to the selection process. Furthermore, the proposed methods are
applicable to other applications with multiple target outputs.


22) State and Topology Estimation for Unobservable Distribution Systems Using Deep Neural Networks

Abstract— Time-synchronized state estimation for reconfig-
urable distribution networks is challenging because of limited
real-time observability. This article addresses this challenge by
formulating a deep learning (DL)-based approach for topology
identification (TI) and unbalanced three-phase distribution sys-
tem state estimation (DSSE). Two deep neural networks (DNNs)
are trained for time-synchronized DNN-based TI and DSSE,
respectively, for systems that are incompletely observed by
synchrophasor measurement devices (SMDs) in real time. A data-
driven approach for judicious SMD placement to facilitate
reliable TI and DSSE is also provided. Robustness of the proposed
methodology is demonstrated by considering non-Gaussian noise
in the SMD measurements. A comparison of the DNN-based
DSSE with more conventional approaches indicates that the
DL-based approach gives better accuracy with smaller number
of SMDs.
To overcome the need for large numbers of real-time
sensors, prior approaches for performing DSSE have used load
forecasts as pseudo-measurements [11], [12]. However, it has
been shown in [13] that using forecast/pseudo-measurements
in real time can deteriorate estimation performance. Instead,
the work of [13] proposed a Bayesian approach that trained
a deep neural network (DNN) to circumvent the real-time
unobservability problem. However, the approach was not vali-
dated for three-phase unbalanced distribution systems. In [14],
an artificial neural network was created for three-phase unbal-
anced DSSE. However, smart meter measurements were not
considered in the analysis (only micro-PMU measurements
were used) and loads were varied by a Gaussian distribution
which might not correctly represent system behavior. A sparse-
tracking state estimator for unbalanced distribution systems
that are incompletely observed by D-PMUs was developed
in [15]. However, it required additional information from event
data that may not be always available and was restricted to
radial networks. A three-phase DSSE based on a Bayesian
fusion procedure was proposed in [16] to account for the
different temporal aspects of the states and measurements.
However, due to the heavy computational burden of the
procedure, it could not handle non-Gaussian loads and mea-
surement noise. Moreover, in [11]–[16], the system topology
was assumed to be fixed.
This article addresses the knowledge gaps identified above
by making the following salient contributions.
1) A DNN-based TI is proposed to estimate switch statuses
in real time from sparsely placed SMDs.
2) A DNN-based DSSE for unbalanced three-phase distrib-
ution networks is developed that estimates states (voltage
phasors) in a fast, time-synchronized manner for both
radial and meshed networks.
3) Transfer learning is employed to account for the effects
of topology changes on DNN-based DSSE.
4) A judicious approach for SMD placement to facilitate
reliable TI and DSSE is presented.
5) Robustness of the proposed method is demonstrated by
considering non-Gaussian noise in SMD measurements.
B. Transfer Learning
Now, a DNN can successfully approximate E(x | z) for
a given topology. However, once the topology changes, the
distribution of the inputs (i.e., SMD measurements), for which
the DNN had been trained, changes. This is the best realized
from the fact that the direction of the currents in a feeder
can reverse when topology change occurs. Thus, there is a
need to update the trained DNN once the topology changes.
One way to do this is to train the DNN for DSSE afresh for
every new topology. However, doing so may take a long time.
An alternate (better) solution is to use Transfer learning to
transfer the knowledge gained from the old topology to the
new topology.
Four approaches have been proposed for implementing
inductive Transfer learning: feature-representation transfer,
instance transfer, relational-knowledge transfer, and parameter
transfer [27]. Here, we use parameter transfer to update the
DNN for DSSE as the DNN’s parameters can be used for
multiple domains. Two well-known parameter-based trans-
fer learning methods are parameter-sharing and fine-tuning,
respectively. Parameter-sharing assumes that the parameters
are highly transferable due to which the parameters in the
source domain can be directly copied to the target domain,
where they are kept “frozen.” Fine-tuning assumes that the
parameters in the source domain are useful, but they must
be trained with limited target domain data to better adapt to
the target domain [28]. Since there is no guarantee that the
parameters of the DNN-based DSSE will be highly trans-
ferable for different topologies, fine-tuning is used in this
article to update the weights of the DNN for DSSE when
topology changes. Essentially, fine-tuning provides a more
effective initialization (than random initialization) by using the
weights from the previously well-trained DNN. By doing this,
it bypasses the need for large amounts of data (and time) for
DNN retraining (see Section V.D for the implementation of
the proposed methodology).
As mentioned in Section I, smart meter measurements
become available after a delay of at least a few hours,
implying that they cannot be directly used for real-time DSSE.
Therefore, the proposed methodology uses the historical slow
timescale smart meter readings in the offline training process
of the DNNs. The smart meter energy readings are first
converted into average power by dividing the energy with
the corresponding time interval. Then, the aggregated net
injection at the distribution transformer level is calculated by
summing up the readings of the smart meters connected to the
transformer. The net load at each transformer is treated as a
random variable.
Next, a kernel density estimator (KDE) is used to learn
the (non-Gaussian) distribution of aggregated smart meter
readings. Although KDE is suitable for learning the PDF of
data samples that do not follow a parametric PDF, it is prone
to overfitting which causes loss of generality of the fitted
PDF [34]. To overcome this problem, we modify the KDE
by adjusting its bandwidth to achieve 95% confidence interval
ensuring that the fitted PDF effectively represents net load
behavior. After the PDF of active power injection is obtained,
the reactive power is computed by selecting a power factor
from a uniform distribution lying between 0.95 and 1. Monte
Carlo (MC) sampling is performed next to pick active and
reactive power injections from the learned distribution to run a
large number of power flows. The voltage and current phasors
obtained from the solved power flows are used to create the
training database.
During the online operation, the trained DNN is fed
with streaming data from SMDs to perform DSSE at SMD
timescales (subsecond time interval). However, as SMD data
were not used in the training process, a question arises
regarding the effectiveness of using calculated average power
to represent instantaneous power injections at subsecond time
resolution. In fact, it is statistically not possible to obtain
the instantaneous power injections from the average power
for one particular time interval. However, we hypothesize that
if sufficient historical data for average powers are available,
it is possible to approximate the PDF of instantaneous power
injections using the historical average power measurements.
A. Simulation Settings
1) Distribution System Setup: Simulations are performed
on a radial IEEE 34-node system (System S1) [38] and
a meshed 240-node distribution network of Midwest U.S.
(System S2) [39]–[40]. In System S1, three distributed gener-
ation (DG) units having the ratings of 135, 60, and 60 kW
are also placed on nodes 822, 848, and 860, respectively,
to model the effect of renewable generation. The loads and
DG units are varied based on the Pecan Street historical
data [41] to create different scenarios for this system. System
S2 has smart meters installed at customer premises and all
the characteristics of a modern distribution network, such
as underground and overhead lines, capacitors and voltage
regulators, and single, double, and three-phase laterals and
loads. One-year of smart meter readings is also available
for this system. PDFs (computed using KDE) were fit to
the historical hourly smart meter data. Network models of
Systems S1 and S2 are available in OpenDSS [42]. The budget
constraint was set at two SMDs for System S1 and ten SMDs
for System S2. 
Lastly, to demonstrate the ability of the proposed approach
to provide real-time state estimates, a stream of high-speed
data obtained from the Pecan Street dataset were set as
inputs to the trained DNN for DSSE. The DNN was able
to consistently track the variations in the states (see plot of
Phase C voltage angle in Fig. 7). Moreover, the DNN took
only 0.01 s to produce the estimates. This is because a trained
DNN performs a matrix multiplication of the input values
with the weights and biases of its neurons—a process that can
be done very fast. Thus, this study shows that the proposed
approach can provide fast (subsecond) situational awareness to
distribution systems that are incompletely observed by SMDs
in real time.
Lastly, to demonstrate the ability of the proposed approach
to provide real-time state estimates, a stream of high-speed
data obtained from the Pecan Street dataset were set as
inputs to the trained DNN for DSSE. The DNN was able
to consistently track the variations in the states (see plot of
Phase C voltage angle in Fig. 7). Moreover, the DNN took
only 0.01 s to produce the estimates. This is because a trained
DNN performs a matrix multiplication of the input values
with the weights and biases of its neurons—a process that can
be done very fast. Thus, this study shows that the proposed
approach can provide fast (subsecond) situational awareness to
distribution systems that are incompletely observed by SMDs
in real time.
are used to find a mapping between the states (voltage phasors)
and the SMD measurements, with the mapping being realized
using
a DNN. When a change in topology occurs, the proposed
framework first detects the change using a DNN built for TI
and, subsequently, employs Transfer learning via fine-tuning
to update the DNN for DSSE in real time for the new topology.
A detailed methodology for SMD placement is also pro-
posed to enhance the performance of DNN-based DSSE
for varying network configurations. Being a greedy search
method, this measurement selection strategy for SMD place-
ment is not guaranteed to be optimal. However, it is deemed
acceptable for the following reasons: 1) the problem being
solved here is un-solvable in the classical sense (i.e., it has
larger number of unknowns than knowns), therefore, there may
not be a sensor placement algorithm that consistently gives the
best results under all operating conditions and 2) the focus is
not on optimizing sensor placement but on getting reasonable
TI and state estimation results, which the proposed placement
strategy is able to provide.
The performance of the proposed DNN-based DSSE is
validated by comparing it with the classical LSE as well
as another ML-based state estimator (SVR-based state esti-
mation). The simulation results on a renewable-rich IEEE
34-node distribution feeder and the meshed 240-node Midwest
U.S. system show that the proposed method: 1) can achieve
similar DSSE accuracy with a significantly smaller number of
SMDs; 2) can efficiently detect varying network topologies for
reconfigurable distribution systems; 3) ensures reliable DSSE
for different topologies; and 4) is robust against non-Gaussian
measurement noise, nonparametric load variations, and renew-
able energy fluctuations. The ability of the proposed algorithm
to provide reliable state estimates with very few SMDs in
large distribution networks for different topologies makes it
a suitable candidate for enhanced monitoring, protection, and
control of actual distribution systems.

23) State Estimation of Smart Power Grid: A Literature Survey

Abstract - Developing new and improving existing energy
technologies, as well as adding information systems to manage the
monitoring and controlling of smart grids, are all part of the
advancement and use of smart power grids. The fast growth of
smart grids necessitates the development of effective state
estimation algorithms. This study gives a review of the literature
on smart power grid state estimation algorithms. Based on the
literature, the study also offers an overview of static and dynamic
state estimation along with traditional and evolutionary
algorithms techniques. Furthermore, a brief discussion on the role
of a generalized state estimator that combined key aspects of a
smart power grid is done. In addition to all these, some significant
difficulties based on smart grid state estimation methodologies,
such as meter placement, the impact of renewable penetration, and
the use of pseudo measurements, were reviewed. The use of both
traditional and contemporary probabilistic and meta-heuristic
approaches has been reviewed. This study can offer utility
engineers and researchers insights into the technological
accomplishments, challenges, and future directions of distribution
system SE research.

Smart grid technologies are a step forward in the
development of the utility industry, as they have the potential to
solve the shortcomings of the current power system [1].
Renewable energy resources (e.g., photovoltaic (PV) and wind)
can be used to feed the smart grid [2]in parallel with the utility
grid to provide a low overall cost. These resources, on the other
hand, have negative effects on the distribution system, such as
high power loss due to reverse feeding of the power flow [3],
voltage fluctuation and unbalanced voltage [4], and voltage rise
[5.] Because of the huge number of nodes, few phase
measurements, and the system's inability to supply a meter at
each node and branch, state estimation is
utilized to estimate the power flow solution of various real- time
information. Weighted least square criteria is a regularly used
state estimator (WLS). The authors of [6] presented novel
approaches for wide-area smart grid monitoring and analysis
[7] shows another method for wide-area network estimate
termed multi-area state estimation (MASE). The previous
approaches had the disadvantage of taking a long time to
execute [8]. Iterative power flow algorithms, in general, take
a lengthy time to estimate smart grid states. The use of phasor
Measurement Units (PMUs) has increased in recent years [9].
PMUs becomes the central part of power distribution systems.
Consequently, unnoticed little variations in parameters (voltage,
current, phase angle, balance of active and reactive power, etc.)
can have an impact on the entire power distribution system.
PMUs quickly identify the issue before it spreads throughout
the system. Additionally, it establishes the phasor of branch
currents or bus voltages that are sampled simultaneously with
the GPS. GPS provides continuous positioning and timing
information under different weatherconditions.
Metaheuristic optimization techniques often make it
possible to successfully handle arising challenges. Here are a
few techniques for SE.
•
SE based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANN)
A method based on artificial neural networks (ANN) was
proposed by the authors in [38] to evaluate the viability and
resilience of smart grid system states. [39] compared the
performance of ANN with WLS and discovered that ANN is
quicker and more accurate. High levels of distributed generators
(DG) are employed in [40–44] to calculate line current and
voltage magnitudes.
•
SE based on Fuzzy Logic
The fuzzy logic-based state estimator in [45-47]incorporates
information using fuzzy set theory. To obtain fuzzy
assessments, this program uses historical data to derive active
and reactive load curves
•
SE based on Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
Authors in [48] introduced Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO),
a very effective and straightforward approach compared to older
meta-heuristic evolutionary algorithms; nonetheless, PSO has a
static model of selection, which lengthens the time it takes to
identify an appropriate area in the solution space. The authors
provide a hybrid PSO in [49] to solve this problem, allowing for
high solution quality while speeding up computation time.
•
SE based on Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
Authors in [48] introduced Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO),
a very effective and straightforward approach compared to older
meta-heuristic evolutionary algorithms; nonetheless, PSO has a
static model of selection, which lengthens the time it takes to
identify an appropriate area in the solution space. The authors
provide a hybrid PSO in [49] to solve this problem, allowing for
high solution quality while speeding up computation time.
If a large number of pseudo measurements with extra errors
are used to make a distribution network visible, the anticipated
state may deviate from the real system state [57–58]. In order to
achieve real-time operation, the need of cautious selection of
new measurement locations and the cost of additional devices
may be substantial. To achieve the ideal number and position of
meters for proper observability, several strategies are described
in [55-56]. Introduces [57] new techniques to enhance accuracy.
PMUs and smart meters can be installed strategically to enhance
system supervision and the precision of smart grid solutions.
Pseudo-measurement creation is utilized to find load
estimation at the distribution level [62]. However, development
in this area is still in progress. Standard load profiles are utilized
instead of AMI data history in some circumstances [63-64] to
do numerical analysis and verification, which saves money.
Smart grids are rapidly evolving, necessitating advanced
state estimate approaches. The topic of locating system states
has been discussed. This paper provides a literature survey on
state estimation techniques for this purpose, which includes
traditional approaches, alternative state estimation techniques,
forecasting-based state estimation techniques, multi-area state
estimation techniques, and meta-heuristic evolutionary
algorithms like ANN, Fuzzy Logic, and PSO algorithms.
Furthermore, the incentives for state estimation in a smart power
system have been discussed. Additionally, significant issues
encountered in determining system states, such as meter
placements, impacts of renewable penetration, applications of
pseudo measurements, and cyber-security, have been explored.
As a result, the main contribution of this work is to describe
various state estimate methodologies, how using smart grids
affects systems without knowing their present states, and what
obstacles are being faced with regard to extensively
implementing smart grids. It would be interesting to investigate
the impact of catastrophic events on distribution system
observability and provide a workable solution in order to allow
effective system state estimate approaches that depend on the
operator's real-time knowledge of system circumstances.


24) Robust Data-Driven State Estimation for Smart Grid

Abstract—A grand challenge for state estimation in newly built
smart grid lies in how to deal with the increasing uncertainties.
To solve the problem, we propose a data-driven state estimation
approach based on recent targeted investment on sensors, data
storage, and computing devices. An architecture is proposed to
use power system physics and pattern to systematically clean
historical data and conduct supervised learning, where histori-
cal similar measurements and their states are used to learn the
relationship between the current measurement and the state. In
order to deal with nonlinearity, kernel trick is used to produce
linear mapping in a carefully selected higher dimensional space.
To speed up the data-driven approach for online services, we
analyze power system data set and discover its clustering prop-
erty due to the periodic pattern of power systems. This leads
to significant dimension reduction and the idea of preorganizing
data points in a tree structure for inquiry, leading to 1000 times
speedup. Numerical results show that the proposed data-driven
approach works well in a smart grid setting with increasing
uncertainties and it produces an online state estimate excelling
current industrial approach.
The contribution of the paper lies in 1) proposing to utilize
the pattern in power systems for using historical data, 2) show-
ing how to combine a nonparametric method to retrieve useful
information, and how to conduct a parametric regression to
fuse the information for the current state estimation, 3) speed-
ing up the process via analyzing the power system pattern,
and 4) adding robustness to the proposed method.
The goal of data-driven state estimation is to utilize histor-
ical data to improve the currently used static state estimation.
We assume the availability of data storage devices recording
historical measurements, topologies, and state estimates. The
problem setup is as below:
• Problem: Obtain a data-driven state estimator
• Given:
– a sequence of historical measurement column vec-
tors: z1, z2, · · · , zk, · · · zQ, where k is the time index,
and Q is the total number of data points in the
database;
– a sequence of historical state estimate column vec-
tors: x1, x2, · · · , xk, · · · , xQ;
– a sequence of historical measurement function sets
based on topology: h1, h2, · · · , hk, · · · , hQ;
– the current measurement column vector: zcurrent;
– the current measurement function set: hcurrent.
• Find: ˆxcurrent = g(zcurrent).
In this paper, we propose to utilize historical data to deal
with increasing uncertainties in power system state estimation.
In particular, we present an architecture to systematically clean
historical data, conduct supervised learning, and speed up the
learning process to enable online state estimation. We show
how to achieve these three steps by employing power system
operation process, applying physical relationship, and using
power system pattern. The numerical results illustrate that the
proposed method can achieve a highly accurate robust data-
driven state estimate in a short time with a 1000 time speedup.


25) Bayesian State Estimation for Unobservable
Distribution Systems via Deep Learning

Abstract—The problem of state estimation for unobservable
distribution systems is considered. A deep learning approach to
Bayesian state estimation is proposed for real-time applications.
The proposed technique consists of distribution learning of
stochastic power injection, a Monte Carlo technique for the
training of a deep neural network for state estimation, and a
Bayesian bad-data detection and filtering algorithm. Structural
characteristics of the deep neural networks are investigated. Sim-
ulations illustrate the accuracy of Bayesian state estimation for
unobservable systems and demonstrate the benefit of employing
a deep neural network. Numerical results show the robustness
of Bayesian state estimation against modeling and estimation
errors and the presence of bad and missing data. Comparing
with pseudo-measurement techniques, direct Bayesian state es-
timation via deep learning neural network outperforms existing
benchmarks.
A direct implication of unobservability is that the class
of state estimators that assume deterministic system state
cannot provide guarantees on the accuracy and consistency
of their estimates. In particular, the popular weighted least-
squares (WLS) estimator and its variants can no longer be used
when the system is unobservable because small WLS error in
model fitting does not imply small error in estimation; large
estimation error may persist even in the absence of noise.
The most important benefit of Bayesian inference is that
observability is no longer required. A Bayesian estimator ex-
ploits probabilistic dependencies of the measurement variables
on the system states; it improves the prior distribution of the
states using available measurements, even if there are only a
few such measurements. Unlike the least squares techniques
that minimize modeling error, a Bayesian estimator minimizes
directly the estimation error.
The main benefit of the proposed Bayesian state estima-
tion is twofold. First, the online computation cost of the
Bayesian estimate is several orders of magnitude lower than
that of the WLS techniques, thanks to the neural network
implementation of the MMSE estimator. Second, the Bayesian
inference framework provides a level of flexibility to assemble
information from a variety of data sources. For instance, smart
meter data are not used directly in state estimation; they
contribute to the learning of the probability distribution of
network states. The issues of incompatible timescales, delayed
measurements, and missing data are mitigated.
The proposed machine learning approach consists of dis-
tribution learning and deep regression learning; the former
uses smart meter data to learn bus injection distributions from
which training samples are drawn. A novel contribution is
learning the distribution of fast timescale power injection from
slow timescale smart meter data. In regression learning, a deep
neural network is trained for the MMSE state estimation. A
key innovation here is the way that the power system model
(the power flow equations) is embedded in the regression
learning.
We adopt a generic static power flow model for an N -
bus three-phase power system. We assume that node 1 is the
slack bus that, for distribution systems, represents the point
of common coupling (PCC), where the distribution network is
connected to the main grid.
The three-phase voltage phasors at bus i is a complex
column vector xi = [x1i , x2i , x3i ]| , where the superscripts are
phase indices, and xki = Vik ∠θik , where Vik is the voltage
magnitude and θik is the phase angle for the state variable at
phase k of bus i. The overall system state x = [x1 , · · · , xN ]|
is the column vector consisting of voltage phasors at all buses.
We adopt a static system model defined by a pair of
equations that characterize the relationship among the vector
of (complex) power injections s = [s1 , · · · , sN ]T at network
buses, the system states x, the vector of measurements z =
[z1 , · · · , zM ]T , and measurement noise e:
x = g(s), z = h(x) + e,
The proposed scheme includes (i) online state estimation in
the upper right of Fig. 1 and (ii) offline learning in the rest of
the figure. This online-offline partition is of course not strict;
the offline learning becomes online if learning continuous as
data arrive.
The online state estimation is through a neural-network ap-
proximation of the MMSE estimator as described in Sec III-B.
The offline learning includes distribution and regression learn-
ing modules. Taking (historical) samples of the smart meter
measurement y, the distribution learning module produces
F̂s that approximates the probability distribution of the net
injection s. The three submodules at the bottom of the figure
are part of the regression learning that produces parameter w of
the neural network. Specifically, the Monte Carlo sampling and
the power flow analysis submodules generate samples from the
estimated net-injection probability distributions F̂s and convert
them to a set of state-measurement training samples {(x, z)}.
The deep neural network training module sets the neural
network parameter w via an empirical risk minimization.

        TIaccuracy was set at 95%, while the DSSEaccuracy was set
at 0.15 for phase angle mean absolute error (MAE) and
0.30% for voltage magnitude mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE).

Insert PMUs:

    - PMU - Measure node Voltage and one branch current
        Vm, Va, Ibm, Iba

        GNN

        NN


    - Next - PMU
        Vm, Va, Iinjm, Iinja

        GNN

        NN


    - Συμβατικοί μετρητές
        Vm, Pinj, Qinj

        GNN

        NN




That sounds interesting! Using a Transformer with Graph Attention Network (GAT) layers for State Estimation suggests you're working with structured data, possibly from power grids, dynamic systems, or another domain where relationships between entities matter.
How a Transformer with GAT Works for State Estimation

    Graph Attention Networks (GAT)
        Instead of treating the input as a simple sequence, GAT layers model node relationships explicitly.
        Each node (state variable) attends to its neighbors using attention weights, allowing the network to learn dynamic dependencies.

    Transformer for Feature Extraction
        The transformer processes time-series or structured data without losing global context.
        Self-attention allows it to capture long-range dependencies between state variables.

    State Estimation with Graphs
        Traditional transformers struggle with irregular structures like power grids or sensor networks, but GAT layers help by learning an optimal adjacency structure.
        GAT enables the model to handle missing data, noisy measurements, or dynamic topology changes.

Potential Use Cases of GAT+Transformers for State Estimation

    Power System State Estimation (PSSE)
        Estimating voltages and currents across an electrical grid.
        GAT helps model the grid structure while transformers capture global dependencies.

    Traffic Flow Estimation
        Using GAT for spatial relationships between roads and transformers for temporal dynamics.

    Sensor Networks (IoT, Smart Cities)
        Estimating missing sensor readings while handling irregular connectivity.

What Challenges Did You Face?

    Did you use positional encodings for node embeddings?
    How did you handle time dependencies? (Recurrent layers, additional self-attention?)
    Did you compare it to LSTMs or traditional Kalman filters for benchmarking?